PENGUIN BOOKS
THE ART OF SEDUCTION
Robert Greene, author of The 48 Laws of Power, has a
degree in classical literature. He lives in Los Angeles.
Visit his Web site: www.seductionbook.com
Joost Elffers is the producer of Viking Studio's best-
selling The Secret Language of Birthdays, The Secret
Language of Relationships, as well as Play with Your Food.
He lives in New York City.the art of eduction
Robert Greene
A Joost Elffers Book
PENGUIN BOOKSPENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell,Victoria 3124, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads,
Albany, Auckland, New Zealand
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin,
a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. 2001
Published in Penguin Books 2003
13579 10 8642
Copyright © Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, 2001
All rights reserved
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders. The publisher apologizes
for any errors or omissions in the list that follows and would be grateful to be
notified of any corrections that should appear in any reprint.
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGUED THE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS:
Greene Robert.
The art of seduction / Robert Greene.
p. cm.
"A Joost Elffers book."
ISBN 0-670-89192-4 (hc.)
ISBN 0 14 20.0119 8 (pbk.)
1. Sexual excitement. 2. Sex instruction. 3. Seduction. I.Title.
HQ31 .G82 2001
306.7—dc21
2001025868
Printed in the United States of America
Set in Bembo
Designed by Jaye Zimet with Joost Elffers
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise
circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other
than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including
this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any
other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law.
Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage
electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author's rights is appreciated.Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint excerpts from the following copyrighted works:
Falling in Love by Francesco Alberoni, translated by Lawrence Venuti. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
Seduction by Jean Baudrillard, translated by Brian Singer. St. Martin's Press, 1990. Copyright © New
World Perspectives. 1990. Reprinted by permission of Palgrave.
The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio, translated by G. H. McWilliam (Penguin Classics 1972, second
edition 1995). Copyright © G. H. McWilliam, 1972, 1995. Reprinted by permission of Penguin
Books Ltd.
Warhol by David Bourdon, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Behind the Mask: On Sexual Demons, Sacred Mothers, Transvestites, Gangsters and Other Japanese Cultural
Heroes by Ian Buruma, Random blouse UK, 1984. Reprinted with permission.
Andreas Capcllanus on Love by Andreas Capellanus. translated by P. G. Walsh. Reprinted by permission
of Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.
The Book of the Courtier by Baldassare Castiglione, translated by George Bull (Penguin Classics 1967,
revised edition 1976). Copyright © George Bull, 1967, 1976. Reprinted by permission of Penguin
Books Ltd.
Portrait of a Seductress: The World of Natalie Barney by Jean Chalon, translated by Carol Barko, Crown
Publishers, Inc., 1979. Reprinted with permission.
Lenin: The Man Behind the Mask by Ronald W. Clark, Faber & Faber Ltd., 1988. Reprinted with
permission.
Pursuit of the Millennium by Norman Cohn. Copyright © 1970 by Oxford University Press. Used by
permission of Oxford University Press, Inc.
Tales from The Thousand and One Nights, translated by N. J. Dawood (Penguin Classics, 1955, revised
edition 1973). Translation copyright © N. J. Dawood. 1954, 1973. Reprinted by permission of
Penguin Books Ltd.
Emma, Lady Hamilton by Flora Fraser, Alfred A. Knopf, 1987. Copyright © 1986 by Flora Fraser.
Reprinted by permission.
Evita: The Real Life of Eva Peron by Nicolas Fraser and Marysa Navarro, W. W Norton & Company,
Inc., 1996. Reprinted by permission.
The World's Lure: Fair Women, Their Loves, Their Power, Their Fates by Alexander von
Gleichen-Russwurm. translated by Hannah Waller, Alfred A. Knopf, 1927. Copyright 1927 by
Alfred A. Knopf. Inc. Reprinted with permission.
The Greek Myths by Robert Graves. Reprinted by permission of Carcanet Press Limited.
The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK by John Hellman, Columbia University Press 1997.
Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press.
The Odyssey by Homer, translated by E. V Rieu (Penguin Classics, 1946). Copyright © The Estate of
E. V. Rieu, 1946. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Life of an Amorous Woman and Other Writings by Ihara Saikaku, translated by Ivan Morris.
Copyright © 1963 by New Directions Publishing Corp. Reprinted by permission of New Directions
Publishing Corp.
"The Seducer's Diary" from Either/Or, Part 1 by Søren Kierkegaard, translated by Howard V. Hong and
Edna H. Hong. Copyright © 1987 by Princeton University Press. Reprinted by permission of
Princeton University Press.
Sirens: Symbols of Seduction by Meri Lao, translated by John Oliphant of Rossie, Park Street Press,
Rochester. Vermont, 1998. Reprinted with permission.
Lives of the Courtesans by Lynne Lawner, Rizzoli, 1987. Reprinted with permission of the author.
The Theatre of Don Juan: A Collection of Plays and Views, 1630-1963 edited with a commentary by
Oscar Mandel. Copyright © 1963 by the University of Nebraska Press. Copyright © renewed 1991 by
the University of Nebraska Press. Reprinted by permission of the University of Nebraska Press.
Don Juan and the Point of Horror by James Mandrell. Reprinted with permission of
Penn State University Press.
Bel-Ami by Guy de Maupassant, translated by Douglas Parmee (Penguin Classics, 1975). Copyright ©
Douglas Parmee. 1975. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Arts and Secrets of Beauty by Lola Montez, Chelsea House, 1969. Used with permission.
The Age of the Crowd by Serge Moscovici. Reprinted with permission ot Cambridge University Press.
The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu, translated by Edward G. Seidensncker, Alfred A. Knopf, 1976.
Copyright © 1976 by Edward G. Seidensticker. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Erotic Poems by Ovid, translated by Peter Green (Penguin Classics, 1982). Copyright © Peter
Green, 1982. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Metamorphoses by Ovid, translated by Mary M. Innes (Penguin Classics, 1955). Copyright ©
Mary M. Innes, 1955. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.My Sister, My Spouse: A Biography of Lou Andreas-Salomé by H. F. Peters, W. W. Norton & Company,
Inc., 1962. Reprinted with permission.
The. Symposium by Plato, translated by Walter Hamilton (Penguin Classics, 1951). Copyright © Walter
Hamilton. 1951. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert (Penguin
Classics, 1960). Copyright © Ian Scott-Kilvert, 1960. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Hooks Ltd.
Love Declared by Denis de Rougemont, translated by Richard Howard. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
The Wisdom of Life and Counsels and Maxims by Arthur Schopenhauer, translated by T. Bailey Saunders
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995). Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon by Sei Shonagon, translated and edited by Ivan Morris, Columbia
University Press. 1991. Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press.
Liaison by Joyce Wadler, published by Bantam Books, 1993. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Max Weber: Essays in Sociology by Max Weber, edited and translated by H. H. Certh and C. Wright
Mills. Copyright 1946, 1958 by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. Used by permission of Oxford
University Press, Inc.
The Game of Hearts: Harriette Wilson & Her Memoirs edited by Lesley Blanch. Copyright © 1955 by
Lesley Blanch. Reprinted with permission of Simon & Schuster.To the memory of my fatherAcknowledgments
First, I would like to thank Anna Biller for her countless contributions to
this book: the research, the many discussions, her invaluable help with the
text itself, and, last but not least, her knowledge of the art of seduction, of
which I have been the happy victim on numerous occasions.
I must thank my mother, Laurette, for supporting me so steadfastly
throughout this project and for being my most devoted fan.
I would like to thank Catherine Léouzon, who some years ago intro-
duced me to Les Liaisons Dangereuses and the world of Valmont.
I would like to thank David Frankel, for his deft editing and for his
much-appreciated advice; Molly Stern at Viking Penguin, for overseeing
the project and helping to shape it; Radha Pancham, for keeping it all orga-
nized and being so patient; and Brett Kelly, for moving things along.
With heavy heart I would like to pay tribute to my cat Boris, who for
thirteen years watched over me as I wrote and whose presence is sorely
missed. His successor, Brutus, has proven to be a worthy muse.
Finally, I would like to honor my father. Words cannot express how
much I miss him and how much he has inspired my work.
iXContents
Acknowlegments • ix
Preface • xix
Part One
The Seductive Character page 1
The Siren page 5
A man is often secretly oppressed by the role he has to play—by always having to be responsi-
ble, in control, and rational. The Siren is the ultimate male fantasy figure because she offers a
total release from the limitations of his life. In her presence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels transported to a realm of pure pleasure. In a world where
women are often too timid to project such an image, learn to take control of the male libido by
embodying his fantasy.
The Rake page 17
A woman never quite feels desired and appreciated enough. She wants attention, but a man is
too often distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy-figure—when he de-
sires a woman, brief though that moment may be, he will go to the ends of the earth for her.
He may be disloyal, dishonest, and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Stir a woman's
repressed longings by adapting the Rake's mix of danger and pleasure.
The Ideal Lover page 29
Most people have dreams in their youth that get shattered or worn down with age. They find
themselves disappointed by people, events, reality, which cannot match their youthful ideals.
Ideal Lovers thrive on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong fantasies. You long for ro-
mance? Adventure? Lofty spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your fantasy. He or
she is an artist in creating the illusion you require. In a world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in following the path of the Ideal Lover.
xixii • Contents
The Dandy page 41
Most of us feel trapped within the limited roles that the world expects us to play. We are in-
stantly attracted to those who are more fluid than we are—those who create their own persona.
Dandies excite us because they cannot be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for our-
selves. They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their own physical image,
which is always startling. Use the power of the Dandy to create an ambiguous, alluring pres-
ence that stirs repressed desires.
The Natural page 53
Childhood is the golden paradise we are always consciously or unconsciously trying to re-create.
The Natural embodies the longed-for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease, caught up in their playful spirit,
transported back to that golden age. Adopt the pose of the Natural to neutralize people's
defensivencss and infect them with helpless delight.
The Coquette page 67
The ability to delay satisfaction is the ultimate art of seduction—while waiting, the victim is
held in thrall. Coquettes are the grand masters of the game, orchestrating a back-and-forth
movement between hope and frustration. They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of
physical pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which, however, proves elu-
sive; yet this only makes their targets pursue them the more. Imitate the alternating heat and
coolness of the Coquette and you will keep the seduced at your heels.
The Charmer page 79
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators, masking their clev-
erness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their method is simple: They deflect atten-
tion from themselves and focus it on their target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain,
adapt to your moods. In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Learn to cast
the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's primary weaknesses: vanity and self-esteem.
The Charismatic page 95
Charisma is a presence that excites us. It comes from an inner quality—self-confidence, sexual
energy, sense of purpose, contentment—that most people lack and want. This quality radiates
outward, permeating the gestures of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary and supe-
rior. They learn to heighten their charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory, an air of mys-
tery. Create the charismatic illusion by radiating intensity while remaining detached.
The Star page 119
Daily life is harsh, and most of us constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and dreams. Stars
feed on this weakness; standing out from others through a distinctive and appealing style, they
make us want to watch them. At the same time, they are vague and ethereal, keeping their
distance, and letting us imagine more than is there. Their dreamlike quality works on our un-
conscious. Learn to become an object of fascination by projecting the glittering but elusive pres-
ence of the Star.Contents • xiii
The Anti-Seducer page 131
Seducers draw you in by the focused, individualized attention they pay to you. Anti-seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed, and unable to grasp the psychology of another person,
they literally repel Anti-Seducers have no self-awareness, and never realize when they are
pestering, imposing, talking too much. Root out anti-seductive qualities in yourself and recog-
nize them in others—there is no pleasure or profit in dealing with the Anti-Seducer.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types page 147
Part Two
The Seductive Process page 161
Phase One: Separation—Stirring Interest and Desire
1 Choose the Right Victim page 167
Everything depends on the target of your seduction. Study your prey thoroughly, and choose
only those who will prove susceptible to your charms. The right victims are those for whom you
can fill a void, who see in you something exotic. They are often isolated or unhappy, or can
easily be made so—for the completely contented person is almost impossible to seduce. The
perfect victim has some quality that inspires strong emotions in you, making your seductive
maneuvers seem more natural and dynamic. The perfect victim allows for the perfect chase.
2 Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly page 177
If you are too direct early on, you risk stirring up a resistance that will never be lowered. At
first there must be nothing of the seducer in your manner. The seduction should begin at an
angle, indirectly, so that the target only gradually becomes aware of you. Haunt the periphery
of your target's life—approach through a third party, or seem to cultivate a relatively neutral re-
lationship, moving gradually from friend to lover. Lull the target into feeling secure, then strike.
3 Send Mixed Signals page 185
Once people are aware of your presence, and perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. Most of us are much too obvious—instead, be hard to
figure out. Send mixed signals: both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthly, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which fascinates even as it confuses. An
elusive, enigmatic aura will make people want to know more, drawing them into your circle.
Create such a power by hinting at something contradictory within you.
4 Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles page 195
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or neglect; people gather around those who
have already attracted interest. To draw your victims closer and make them hungry to possess
you, you must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and courted by many. It will
become a point of vanity for them to be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away
from a crowd of admirers. Build a reputation that precedes you: If many have succumbed to
your charms, there must be a reason.xiv • Contents
5 Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent page 203
A perfectly satisfied person cannot be seduced. Tension and disharmony must be instilled in
your targets minds. Stir within them feelings of discontent, an unhappiness with their circum-
stances and with themselves. The feelings of inadequacy that you create will give you space to
insinuate yourself, to make them see you as the answer to their problems. Pain and anxiety are
the proper precursors to pleasure. Learn to manufacture the need that you can fill.
6 Master the Art of Insinuation page 211
Making your targets feel dissatisfied and in need of your attention is essential, but if you are
too obvious, they will see through you and grow defensive. There is no known defense, how-
ever, against insinuation—the art of planting ideas in people's minds by dropping elusive hints
that take root days later, even appearing to them as their own idea. Create a sublanguage—
bold statements followed by retraction and apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk combined
with alluring glances—that enters the target's unconscious to convey your real meaning. Make
everything suggestive.
7 Enter Their Spirit page 219
Most people are locked in their own worlds, making them stubborn and hard to persuade. The
way to lure them out of their shell and set up your seduction is to enter their spirit. Play by
their rules, enjoy what they enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will stroke
their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses. Indulge your targets' every mood and
whim, giving them nothing to react against or resist.
8 Create Temptation page 229
Lure the target deep into your seduction by creating the proper temptation: a glimpse of the
pleasures to come. As the serpent tempted Eve with the promise of forbidden knowledge, you
must awaken a desire in your targets that they cannot control. Find that weakness of theirs,
that fantasy that has yet to be realized, and hint that you can lead them toward it. The key is
to keep it vague. Stimulate a curiosity stronger than the doubts and anxieties that go with it,
and they will follow you.
Phase Two: Lead Astray—Creating Pleasure and Confusion
9 Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? page 241
The moment people feel they know what to expect from you, your spell on them is broken.
More: You have ceded them power. The only way to lead the seduced along and keep the up-
per hand is to create suspense, a calculated surprise. Doing something they do not expect from
you will give them a delightful sense of spontaneity—they will not be able to foresee what
comes next. You are always one step ahead and in control. Give the victim a thrill with a sud-
den change of direction.Contents • xv
10 Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion page 251
It is hard to make people listen; they are consumed with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them listen is to say what they want to hear, to
fill their ears with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seductive language. In-
flame people's emotions with loaded phrases, flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop
them in sweet words and promises, and not only will they listen to you, they will lose their
will to resist you.
11 Pay Attention to Detail page 265
Lofty words of love and grand gestures can be suspicious: Why are you trying so hard to
please? The details of a seduction—the subtle gestures, the offhand things you do—are often
more charming and revealing. You must learn to distract your victims with a myriad of pleas-
ant little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored just for them, clothes and adornments designed to
please them, gestures that show the time and attention you are paying them. Mesmerized by
what they see, they will not notice what you are really up to.
12 Poeticize Your Presence page 277
Important things happen when your targets are alone: The slightest feeling of relief that you
are not there, and it is all over. Familiarity and overexposure will cause this reaction. Remain
elusive, then. Intrigue your targets by alternating an exciting presence with a cool distance,
exuberant moments followed by calculated absences. Associate yourself with poetic images and
objects, so that when they think of you, they begin to see you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the more they will envelop you in seductive fantasies.
13 Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability page 285
Too much maneuvering on your part may raise suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks is
to make the other person feel superior and stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, en-
thralled by the other person, and unable to control yourself you will make your actions look
more natural, less calculated. Physical weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help cre-
ate the effect. Play the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
14 Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion page 295
To compensate for the difficulties in their lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming,
imagining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can create the illusion that
through you they can live out their dreams, you will have them at your mercy. Aim at secret
wishes that have been thwarted or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable emotions, clouding their
powers of reason. Lead the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can no longer tell the
difference between illusion and reality.
15 Isolate the Victim page 309
An isolated person is weak. By slowly isolating your victims, you make them more vulnerable
to your influence. Take them away from their normal milieu, friends, family, home. Give them
the sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have no outside support, and in their confusion they are
easily led astray. Lure the seduced into your lair, where nothing is familiar.xvi • Contents
Phase Three: The Precipice—Deepening the Effect Through Extreme Measures
16 Prove Yourself page 321
Most people want to be seduced. If they resist your efforts, it is probably because you ham' not
gone far enough to allay their doubts—about your motives, the depth of your feelings, and so
on. One well-timed action that shows how far you are willing to go to win them over will dis-
pel their doubts. Do not worry about looking foolish or making a mistake—any kind of deed
that is self-sacrificing and for your targets' sake will so overwhelm their emotions, they won't
notice anything else.
17 Effect a Regression page 333
People who have experienced a certain kind of pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories are usually those from earliest child-
hood, and are often unconsciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your targets back to
that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle and positioning them as the needy child.
Unaware of the cause of their emotional response, they will fall in love with you.
18 Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo page 349
There are always social limits on what one can do. Some of these, the most elemental taboos,
go back centuries; others are more superficial, simply defining polite and acceptable behavior.
Making your targets feel that you are leading them past either kind of limit is immensely se-
ductive. People yearn to explore their dark side. Once the desire to transgress draws your tar-
gets to you, it will be hard for them to stop. Take them farther than they imagined—the
shared feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
19 Use Spiritual Lures page 359
Everyone has doubts and insecurities—about their body, their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the physical, you will stir up these doubts and make your
targets self-conscious. Instead, lure them out of their insecurities by making them focus on
something sublime and spiritual: a religious experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Lost in
a spiritual mist, the target will feel light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of your seduction
by making its sexual culmination seem like the spiritual union of two souls.
20 Mix Pleasure with Pain page 369
The greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice. At first, perhaps, your kindness is charm-
ing, but it soon grows monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. In-
stead of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Make them feel
guilty and insecure. Instigate a breakup—now a rapprochement, a return to your earlier kind-
ness, will turn them weak at the knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs.
To heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement of fear.Contents • xvii
Phase Four: Moving In for the Kill
21 Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued page 383
If your targets become too used to you as the aggressor, they will give less of their own energy,
and the tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the tables. Once they are under
your spell, take a step bach and they will start to come after you. Hint that you are growing
bored. Seem interested in someone else. Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. Create the illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
22 Use Physical Lures page 393
Targets with active minds are dangerous: If they see through your manipulations, they may
suddenly develop doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken their dormant senses, by
combining a nondefensive attitude with a charged sexual presence. While your cool, noncha-
lant air is lowering their inhibitions, your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex and
desire—are getting under their skin and raising their temperature. Never force the physical;
instead infect your targets with heat, lure them into lust. Morality, judgment, and concern for
the future will all melt away.
23 Master the Art of the Bold Move page 405
A moment has arrived: Your victim clearly desires you, but is not ready to admit it openly, let
alone act on it. This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry and to over-
whelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider the consequences. Showing
hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of yourself as opposed to being over-
whelmed by the victim's charms. One person must go on the offensive, and it is you.
24 Beware the Aftereffects page 415
Danger follows in the aftermath of a successful seduction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward lassitude, distrust, disappointment. If you
are to part, make the sacrifice swift and sudden. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a
flagging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the fantasy. A second seduction is re-
quired. Never let the other person take you for granted—use absence, create pain and conflict,
to keep the seduced on tenterhooks.
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time page 431
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses page 441
Selected Bibliography • 455
Index • 457Preface
Thousands of years ago, power was mostly gained through physical vio-
lence and maintained with brute strength. There was little need for
subtlety—a king or emperor had to be merciless. Only a select few had
power, but no one suffered under this scheme of things more than women.
They had no way to compete, no weapon at their disposal that could make
a man do what they wanted—politically, socially, or even in the home.
Of course men had one weakness: their insatiable desire for sex. A
woman could always toy with this desire, but once she gave in to sex the
man was back in control; and if she withheld sex, he could simply look
elsewhere—or exert force. What good was a power that was so temporary
and frail? Yet women had no choice but to submit to this condition. There
were some, though, whose hunger for power was too great, and who, over
the years, through much cleverness and creativity, invented a way of turn-
ing the dynamic around, creating a more lasting and effective form of
power.
These women—among them Bathsheba, from the Old Testament;
Helen of Troy; the Chinese siren Hsi Shi; and the greatest of them all,
Cleopatra—invented seduction. First they would draw a man in with an al-
luring appearance, designing their makeup and adornment to fashion the
image of a goddess come to life. By showing only glimpses of flesh, they
would tease a man's imagination, stimulating the desire not just for sex but
for something greater: the chance to possess a fantasy figure. Once they had
their victims' interest, these women would lure them away from the mascu-
line world of war and politics and get them to spend time in the feminine
world—a world of luxury, spectacle, and pleasure. They might also lead
them astray literally, taking them on a journey, as Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar on a trip down the Nile. Men would grow hooked on these refined,
sensual pleasures—they would fall in love. But then, invariably, the women
would turn cold and indifferent, confusing their victims. Just when the
men wanted more, they found their pleasures withdrawn. They would be
forced into pursuit, trying anything to win back the favors they once had
tasted and growing weak and emotional in the process. Men who had
physical force and all the social power—men like King David, the Trojan
Paris, Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, King Fu Chai—would find themselves
becoming the slave of a woman.
In the face of violence and brutality, these women made seduction aOppression and scorn,
thus, were and must have
been generally the share of
women in emerging
societies; this state lasted in
all its force until centuries
of experience taught them
to substitute skill for force.
Women at last sensed that,
since they were weaker,
their only resource was to
seduce; they understood
that if they were dependent
on men through force, men
could become dependent on
them through pleasure.
More unhappy than men,
they must have thought
and reflected earlier than
did men; they were the first
to know that pleasure was
always beneath the idea
that one formed of it, and
that the imagination went
farther than nature. Once
these basic truths were
known, they learned first
to veil their charms in order
to awaken curiosity; they
practiced the difficult art of
refusing even as they
wished to consent; from
that moment on, they
knew how to set men's
imagination afire, they
knew how to arouse and
direct desires as they
pleased: thus did beauty
and love come into being;
now the lot of womenxx • Preface
sophisticated art, the ultimate form of power and persuasion. They learned
to work on the mind first, stimulating fantasies, keeping a man wanting
more, creating patterns of hope and despair—the essence of seduction.
Their power was not physical but psychological, not forceful but indirect
and cunning. These first great seductresses were like military generals plan-
ning the destruction of an enemy, and indeed early accounts of seduction
often compare it to battle, the feminine version of warfare. For Cleopatra,
it was a means of consolidating an empire. In seduction, the woman was no
longer a passive sex object; she had become an active agent, a figure of
power.
With a few exceptions—the Latin poet Ovid, the medieval
troubadours—men did not much concern themselves with such a frivolous
art as seduction. Then, in the seventeenth century came a great change:
men grew interested in seduction as a way to overcome a young woman's
resistance to sex. History's first great male seducers—the Duke de Lauzun,
the different Spaniards who inspired the Don Juan legend—began to adopt
the methods traditionally employed by women. They learned to dazzle
with their appearance (often androgynous in nature), to stimulate the
imagination, to play the coquette. They also added a new, masculine ele-
ment to the game: seductive language, for they had discovered a woman's
weakness for soft words. These two forms of seduction—the feminine use
of appearances and the masculine use of language—would often cross
gender lines: Casanova would dazzle a woman with his clothes; Ninon
de l'Enclos would charm a man with her words.
At the same time that men were developing their version of seduction,
others began to adapt the art for social purposes. As Europe's feudal system
of government faded into the past, courtiers needed to get their way in
court without the use of force. They learned the power to be gained by se-
ducing their superiors and competitors through psychological games, soft
words, a little coquetry. As culture became democratized, actors, dandies,
and artists came to use the tactics of seduction as a way to charm and win
over their audience and social milieu. In the nineteenth century another
great change occurred: politicians like Napoleon consciously saw them-
selves as seducers, on a grand scale. These men depended on the art of se-
ductive oratory, but they also mastered what had once been feminine
strategies: staging vast spectacles, using theatrical devices, creating a charged
physical presence. All this, they learned, was the essence of charisma—and
remains so today. By seducing the masses they could accumulate immense
power without the use of force.
Today we have reached the ultimate point in the evolution of seduc-
tion. Now more than ever, force or brutality of any kind is discouraged. All
areas of social life require the ability to persuade people in a way that does
not offend or impose itself. Forms of seduction can be found everywhere,
blending male and female strategies. Advertisements insinuate, the soft sell
dominates. If we are to change people's opinions—and affecting opinion is
basic to seduction—we must act in subtle, subliminal ways. Today no politi-became less harsh, not that
they had managed to
liberate themselves entirely
from the state of oppression
to which their weakness
condemned them; but, in
the state of perpetual war
that continues to exist
between women and men,
one has seen them, with
the help of the caresses they
have been able to invent,
combat ceaselessly,
sometimes vanquish, and
often more skillfully take
advantage of the forces
directed against them;
sometimes, too, men have
turned against women
these weapons the women
had forged to combat them,
and their slavery has
become all the harsher
for it.
—CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, ON
THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY LYDIA DAVIS, IN
THE LIBERTINE READER,
EDITED BY MICHAEL FEHER
Much more genius is
needed to make love than
to command armies.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Menelaus, if you are really
going to kill her, \ Then
my blessing go with you,
but you must do it now, \
Before her looks so twist
the strings of your heart \
That they turn your mind;
for her eyes are like armies,
\And where her glances
fall, there cities burn, \
Until the dust of their
ashes is blown \ By her
sighs. I know her,
Men elans, \ And so do
you. And all those who
know her suffer.
—HECUBA SPEAKING ABOUT
HELEN OF TROY IN EURIPIDES,
THE TROJAN WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY NEIL CURRYPreface • xxi
cal campaign can work without seduction. Since the era of John F.
Kennedy, political figures are required to have a degree of charisma, a fasci-
nating presence to keep their audience's attention, which is half the battle.
The film world and media create a galaxy of seductive stars and images. We
are saturated in the seductive. But even if much has changed in degree and
scope, the essence of seduction is constant: never be forceful or direct; in-
stead, use pleasure as bait, playing on people's emotions, stirring desire and
confusion, inducing psychological surrender. In seduction as it is practiced
today, the methods of Cleopatra still hold.
People are constantly trying to influence us, to tell us what to do, and just
as often we tune them out, resisting their attempts at persuasion. There is a
moment in our lives, however, when we all act differently—when we are in
love. We fall under a kind of spell. Our minds are usually preoccupied with
our own concerns; now they become filled with thoughts of the loved one.
We grow emotional, lose the ability to think straight, act in foolish ways
that we would never do otherwise. If this goes on long enough something
inside us gives way: we surrender to the will of the loved one, and to our
desire to possess them.
Seducers are people who understand the tremendous power contained
in such moments of surrender. They analyze what happens when people
are in love, study the psychological components of the process—what spurs
the imagination, what casts a spell. By instinct and through practice they
master the art of making people fall in love. As the first seductresses knew,
it is much more effective to create love than lust. A person in love is emo-
tional, pliable, and easily misled. (The origin of the word "seduction" is the
Latin for "to lead astray") A person in lust is harder to control and, once
satisfied, may easily leave you. Seducers take their time, create enchantment
and the bonds of love, so that when sex ensues it only further enslaves
the victim. Creating love and enchantment becomes the model for all
seductions—sexual, social, political. A person in love will surrender.
It is pointless to try to argue against such power, to imagine that you are
not interested in it, or that it is evil and ugly. The harder you try to resist
the lure of seduction—as an idea, as a form of power—the more you will
find yourself fascinated. The reason is simple: most of us have known the
power of having someone fall in love with us. Our actions, gestures, the
things we say, all have positive effects on this person; we may not com-
pletely understand what we have done right, but this feeling of power is in-
toxicating. It gives us confidence, which makes us more seductive. We may
also experience this in a social or work setting—one day we are in an ele-
vated mood and people seem more responsive, more charmed by us. These
moments of power are fleeting, but they resonate in the memory with
great intensity. We want them back. Nobody likes to feel awkward or timid
or unable to reach people. The siren call of seduction is irresistible because
power is irresistible, and nothing will bring you more power in the modern
world than the ability to seduce. Repressing the desire to seduce is a kind ofNo man hath it in his
power to over-rule the
deceitfulness of a woman.
—MARGUERITE OF NAVARRE
This important side-track,
by which woman succeeded
in evading man's strength
and establishing herself in
power, has not been given
due consideration by
historians. From the
moment when the woman
detached herself from the
crowd, an individual
finished product, offering
delights which could not be
obtained by force, but only
by flattery .... the reign
of love's priestesses was
inaugurated. It was a
development of far-reaching
importance in the history of
civilization. . . . Only by
the circuitous route of the
art of love could woman
again assert authority, and
this she did by asserting
herself at the very point at
which she would normally
be a slave at the man's
mercy. She had discovered
the might of lust, the secret
of the art of love, the
daemonic power of a
passion artificially aroused
and never satiated. The
force tints unchained was
thenceforth to count among
the most tremendous of the
world's forces and at
moments to have power
even over life and death. . . .
• The deliberate spell-
binding of man's senses
was to have a magical effect
upon him, opening up an
infinitely wider range of
sensation and spurring him
on as if impelled by an
inspired dream.
—ALEXANDER VON GLEICHEN-
RUSSWURM, THE WORLD'S
LURE, TRANSLATED BY HANNAH
WALLERxxii • Preface
hysterical reaction, revealing your deep-down fascination with the process;
you are only making your desires stronger. Some day they will come to the
surface.
To have such power does not require a total transformation in your
character or any kind of physical improvement in your looks. Seduction is a
game of psychology, not beauty, and it is within the grasp of any person to
become a master at the game. All that is required is that you look at the
world differently, through the eyes of a seducer.
A seducer does not turn the power off and on—every social and per-
sonal interaction is seen as a potential seduction. There is never a moment
to waste. This is so for several reasons. The power seducers have over a man
or woman works in social environments because they have learned how to
tone down the sexual element without getting rid of it. We may think we
see through them, but they are so pleasant to be around anyway that it does
not matter. Trying to divide your life into moments in which you seduce
and others in which you hold back will only confuse and constrain you.
Erotic desire and love lurk beneath the surface of almost every human en-
counter; better to give free rein to your skills than to try to use them only
in the bedroom. (In fact, the seducer sees the world as his or her bedroom.)
This attitude creates great seductive momentum, and with each seduction
you gain experience and practice. One social or sexual seduction makes the
next one easier, your confidence growing and making you more alluring.
People are drawn to you in greater numbers as the seducer's aura descends
upon you.
Seducers have a warrior's outlook on life. They see each person as a
kind of walled castle to which they are laying siege. Seduction is a process
of penetration: initially penetrating the target's mind, their first point of
defense. Once seducers have penetrated the mind, making the target fanta-
size about them, it is easy to lower resistance and create physical surrender.
Seducers do not improvise; they do not leave this process to chance. Like
any good general, they plan and strategize, aiming at the target's particular
weaknesses.
The main obstacle to becoming a seducer is this foolish prejudice we
have of seeing love and romance as some kind of sacred, magical realm
where things just fall into place, if they are meant to. This might seem ro-
mantic and quaint, but it is really just a cover for our laziness. What will se-
duce a person is the effort we expend on their behalf, showing how much
we care, how much they are worth. Leaving things to chance is a recipe for
disaster, and reveals that we do not take love and romance very seriously. It
was the effort Casanova expended, the artfulness he applied to each affair
that made him so devilishly seductive. Falling in love is a matter not of
magic but of psychology. Once you understand your target's psychology,
and strategize to suit it, you will be better able to cast a "magical" spell. A
seducer sees love not as sacred but as warfare, where all is fair.
Seducers are never self-absorbed. Their gaze is directed outward, not
inward. When they meet someone their first move is to get inside that per-The first thing to get in
your head is that every
single \ Girl can be
caught—and that you'll
catch her if \ You set your
toils right. Birds will
sooner fall dumb in \
Springtime, \ Cicadas in
summer, or a hunting-dog \
Turn his back on a hare,
than a lover's bland
inducements \ Can fail
with a woman, Even one
you suppose \ Reluctant
will want it.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The combination of these
two elements, enchantment
and surrender, is, then,
essential to the love which
we are discussing. . . .
What exists in love is
surrender due to
enchantment.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET, ON
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY TOBY
TALBOT
What is good?—All that
heightens the feeling of
power, the will to power,
power itself in man. •
What is bad?—All that
proceeds from weakness. •
What is happiness?—The
feeling that power
increases—that a resistance
is overcome.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, THE
ANTI—CHRIST, TRANSLATED BY
R. J. HOLLINGDALEPreface • xxiii
son's skin, to see the world through their eyes. The reasons for this are sev-
eral. First, self-absorption is a sign of insecurity; it is anti-seductive. Every-
one has insecurities, but seducers manage to ignore them, finding therapy
for moments of self-doubt by being absorbed in the world. This gives them
a buoyant spirit—we want to be around them. Second, getting into some-
one's skin, imagining what it is like to be them, helps the seducer gather
valuable information, learn what makes that person tick, what will make
them lose their ability to think straight and fall into a trap. Armed with
such information, they can provide focused and individualized attention—a
rare commodity in a world in which most people see us only from behind
the screen of their own prejudices. Getting into the targets' skin is the first
important tactical move in the war of penetration.
Seducers see themselves as providers of pleasure, like bees that gather
pollen from some flowers and deliver it to others. As children we mostly
devoted our lives to play and pleasure. Adults often have feelings of being
cut off from this paradise, of being weighed down by responsibilities. The
seducer knows that people are waiting for pleasure—they never get enough
of it from friends and lovers, and they cannot get it by themselves. A person
who enters their lives offering adventure and romance cannot be resisted.
Pleasure is a feeling of being taken past our limits, of being overwhelmed—
by another person, by an experience. People are dying to be overwhelmed,
to let go of their usual stubbornness. Sometimes their resistance to us is
a way of saying, Please seduce me. Seducers know that the possibility of
pleasure will make a person follow them, and the experience of it will
make someone open up, weak to the touch. They also train themselves to
be sensitive to pleasure, knowing that feeling pleasure themselves will make
it that much easier for them to infect the people around them.
A seducer sees all of life as theater, everyone an actor. Most people feel
they have constricted roles in life, which makes them unhappy. Seducers,
on the other hand, can be anyone and can assume many roles. (The arche-
type here is the god Zeus, insatiable seducer of young maidens, whose
main weapon was the ability to assume the form of whatever person or ani-
mal would most appeal to his victim.) Seducers take pleasure in performing
and are not weighed down by their identity, or by some need to be them-
selves, or to be natural. This freedom of theirs, this fluidity in body and
spirit, is what makes them attractive. What people lack in life is not more
reality but illusion, fantasy, play. The clothes that seducers wear, the places
they take you to, their words and actions, are slightly heightened—not
overly theatrical but with a delightful edge of unreality, as if the two of you
were living out a piece of fiction or were characters in a film. Seduction is
a kind of theater in real life, the meeting of illusion and reality.
Finally, seducers are completely amoral in their approach to life. It is all
a game, an arena for play. Knowing that the moralists, the crabbed repressed
types who croak about the evils of the seducer, secretly envy their power,
they do not concern themselves with other people's opinions. They do not
deal in moral judgments—nothing could be less seductive. Everything isThe disaffection, neurosis,
anguish and frustration
encountered by
psychoanalysis comes no
doubt from being unable to
love or to be loved, from
being unable to give or take
pleasure, but the radical
disenchantment comes from
seduction and its failure.
Only those who lie
completely outside
seduction are ill, even if
they remain fully capable of
loving and making love.
Psychoanalysis believes it
treats the disorder of sex
and desire, but in reality it
is dealing with the
disorders of seduction. . . .
The most serious
deficiencies always concern
charm and not pleasure,
enchantment and not some
vital or sexual satisfaction.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION
Whatever is done from love
always occurs beyond good
and evil.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,
BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
KAUFMANNxxiv • Preface
pliant, fluid, like life itself. Seduction is a form of deception, but people
want to be led astray, they yearn to be seduced. If they didn't, seducers
would not find so many willing victims. Get rid of any moralizing tenden-
cies, adopt the seducer's playful philosophy, and you will find the rest of the
process easy and natural.
The Art of Seduction is designed to arm you with weapons of persuasion and
charm, so that those around you will slowly lose their ability to resist with-
out knowing how or why it has happened. It is an art of war for delicate
times.
Every seduction has two elements that you must analyze and under-
stand: first, yourself and what is seductive about you; and second, your tar-
get and the actions that will penetrate their defenses and create surrender.
The two sides are equally important. If you strategize without paying at-
tention to the parts of your character that draw people to you, you will be
seen as a mechanical seducer, slimy and manipulative. If you rely on your
seductive personality without paying attention to the other person, you will
make terrible mistakes and limit your potential.
Consequently, The Art of Seduction is divided into two parts. The first
half, "The Seductive Character," describes the nine types of seducer, plus
the Anti-Seducer. Studying these types will make you aware of what is
inherently seductive in your character, the basic building block of any se-
duction. The second half, "The Seductive Process," includes the twenty-
four maneuvers and strategies that will instruct you on how to create a
spell, break down people's resistance, give movement and force to your
seduction, and induce surrender in your target. As a kind of bridge be-
tween the two parts, there is a chapter on the eighteen types of victims of a
seduction—each of them missing something from their lives, each cradling
an emptiness you can fill. Knowing what type you are dealing with will
help you put into practice the ideas in both sections. Ignore any part of this
book and you will be an incomplete seducer.
The ideas and strategies in The Art of Seduction are based on the writings
and historical accounts of the most successful seducers in history. The
sources include the seducers' own memoirs (by Casanova, Errol Flynn, Na-
talie Barney, Marilyn Monroe); biographies (of Cleopatra, Josephine Bona-
parte, John F. Kennedy, Duke Ellington); handbooks on the subject (most
notably Ovid's Art of Love); and fictional accounts of seductions (Choderlos
de Laclos's Dangerous Liaisons, Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary,
Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji). The heroes and heroines of these lit-
erary works are generally modeled on real-life seducers. The strategies they
employ reveal the intimate connection between fiction and seduction, cre-
ating illusion and leading a person along. In putting the book's lessons into
practice, you will be following in the path of the greatest masters of the art.
Finally, the spirit that will make you a consummate seducer is the spirit
in which you should read this book. The French writer Denis Diderot
once wrote, "I give my mind the liberty to follow the first wise or foolishShould anyone here in
Rome lack finesse at love-
making, \ Let him \ Try
me—read my book, and
results are guaranteed! \
Technique is the secret.
Charioteer, sailor,
oarsman, \ All need it.
Technique can control \
Love himself.
—OVID, THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREENPreface • xxv
idea that presents itself, just as in the avenue de Foy our dissolute youths
follow close on the heels of some strumpet, then leave her to pursue an-
other, attacking all of them and attaching themselves to none. My thoughts
are my strumpets." He meant that he let himself be seduced by ideas, fol-
lowing whichever one caught his fancy until a better one came along, his
thoughts infused with a kind of sexual excitement. Once you enter these
pages, do as Diderot advised: let yourself be lured by the stories and ideas,
your mind open and your thoughts fluid. Slowly you will find yourself ab-
sorbing the poison through the skin and you will begin to see everything as
a seduction, including the way you think and how you look at the world.
Most virtue is a demand for greater seduction.
—NATALIE BARNEYWe all have the power of attraction—the ability to draw people in and
hold them in our thrall. Far from all of us, though, are aware of this
inner potential, and we imagine attractiveness instead as a near-mystical
trait that a select few are born with and the rest will never command. Yet all
we need to do to realize our potential is understand what it is in a person's
character that naturally excites people and develop these latent qualities
within us.
Successful seductions rarely begin with an obvious maneuver or strate-
gic device. That is certain to arouse suspicion. Successful seductions begin
with your character, your ability to radiate some quality that attracts people
and stirs their emotions in a way that is beyond their control. Hypnotized
by your seductive character, your victims will not notice your subsequent
manipulations. It will then be child's play to mislead and seduce them.
There are nine seducer types in the world. Each type has a particular
character trait that comes from deep within and creates a seductive pull.
Sirens have an abundance of sexual energy and know how to use it. Rakes
insatiably adore the opposite sex, and their desire is infectious. Ideal Lovers
have an aesthetic sensibility that they apply to romance. Dandies like to play
with their image, creating a striking and androgynous allure. Naturals are
spontaneous and open. Coquettes are self-sufficient, with a fascinating cool
at their core. Charmers want and know how to please—they are social crea-
tures. Charismatics have an unusual confidence in themselves. Stars are ethe-
real and envelop themselves in mystery.
The chapters in this section will take you inside each of the nine types.
At least one of the chapters should strike a chord—you will recognize part
of yourself. That chapter will be the key to developing your own powers of
attraction. Let us say you have coquettish tendencies. The Coquette chap-
ter will show you how to build upon your own self-sufficiency, alternating
heat and coldness to ensnare your victims. It will show you how to take
your natural qualities further, becoming a grand Coquette, the type we
fight over. There is no point in being timid with a seductive quality. We are
charmed by an unabashed Rake and excuse his excesses, but a halfhearted
Rake gets no respect. Once you have cultivated your dominant character
trait, adding some art to what nature has given you, you can then develop a
second or third trait, adding depth and mystery to your persona. Finally the
section's tenth chapter, on the Anti-Seducer, will make you aware of the op-
34 • The Art of Seduction
posite potential within you—the power of repulsion. At all cost you must
root out any anti-seductive tendencies you may have.
Think of the nine types as shadows, silhouettes. Only by stepping into
one of them and letting it grow inside you can you begin to develop the
seductive character that will bring you limitless power.A
man is often
secretly oppressed by
the role he has to
play—by always having to
be responsible, in control, and
rational. The Siren is the ulti-
mate male fantasy figure because
she offers a total release from the
limitations of his life. In her pres-
ence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels
transported to a world of pure plea-
sure. She is dangerous, and in pursu-
ing her energetically the man can lose
control over himself something he
yearns to do. The Siren is a mirage;
she lures men by cultivating a par-
ticular appearance and manner.
In a world where women are
often too timid to project such
an image, learn to take
control of the male li-
bido by embodying
his fantasy.The Spectacular Siren
In the year 48 B.C., Ptolemy XIV of Egypt managed to depose and exile
his sister and wife, Queen Cleopatra. He secured the country's borders
against her return and began to rule on his own. Later that year, Julius Cae-
sar came to Alexandria to ensure that despite the local power struggles,
Egypt would remain loyal to Rome.
One night Caesar was meeting with his generals in the Egyptian palace,
discussing strategy, when a guard entered to report that a Greek merchant
was at the door bearing a large and valuable gift for the Roman leader.
Caesar, in the mood for a little fun, gave the merchant permission to enter.
The man came in, carrying on his shoulders a large rolled-up carpet. He
undid the rope around the bundle and with a snap of his wrists unfurled
it—revealing the young Cleopatra, who had been hidden inside, and who
rose up half clothed before Caesar and his guests, like Venus emerging from
the waves.
Everyone was dazzled at the sight of the beautiful young queen (only
twenty-one at the time) appearing before them suddenly as if in a dream.
They were astounded at her daring and theatricality—smuggled into the
harbor at night with only one man to protect her, risking everything on a
bold move. No one was more enchanted than Caesar. According to the
Roman writer Dio Cassius, "Cleopatra was in the prime of life. She had a
delightful voice which could not fail to cast a spell over all who heard it.
Such was the charm of her person and her speech that they drew the cold-
est and most determined misogynist into her toils. Caesar was spellbound as
soon as he set eyes on her and she opened her mouth to speak." That same
evening Cleopatra became Caesar s lover.
Caesar had had numerous mistresses before, to divert him from the rig-
ors of his campaigns. But he had always disposed of them quickly to return
to what really thrilled him—political intrigue, the challenges of warfare,
the Roman theater. Caesar had seen women try anything to keep him un-
der their spell. Yet nothing prepared him for Cleopatra. One night she
would tell him how together they could revive the glory of Alexander the
Great, and rule the world like gods. The next she would entertain him
dressed as the goddess Isis, surrounded by the opulence of her court.
Cleopatra initiated Caesar in the most decadent revelries, presenting herself
as the incarnation of the Egyptian exotic. His life with her was a constant
game, as challenging as warfare, for the moment he felt secure with her sheIn the mean time our good
ship, with that perfect wind
to drive her, fast
approached the Sirens' Isle.
But now the breeze
dropped, some power lulled
the waves, and a breathless
calm set in. Rising from
their seats my men drew
in the sail and threw it into
the hold, then sat down
at the oars and churned the
water white with their
blades of polished pine.
Meanwhile I took a large
round of wax, cut it up
small with my sword, and
kneaded the pieces with all
the strength of my fingers.
The wax soon yielded to
my vigorous treatment and
grew warm, for I had the
rays of my Lord the Sun to
help me. I took each of my
men in turn and plugged
their ears with it. They
then made me a prisoner
on my ship by binding me
hand and foot, standing
me up by the step of the
mast and tying the rope's
ends to the mast itself.
This done, they sat down
once more and struck the
grey water with their oars.
• We made good progress
and had just come within
call of the shore when the
Sirens became aware that a
ship was swiftly bearing
78 • The Art of Seduction
would suddenly turn cold or angry and he would have to find a way to re-
gain her favor.
The weeks went by. Caesar got rid of all Cleopatra's rivals and found
excuses to stay in Egypt. At one point she led him on a lavish historical ex-
pedition down the Nile. In a boat of unimaginable splendor—towering
fifty-four feet out of the water, including several terraced levels and a pil-
lared temple to the god Dionysus—Caesar became one of the few Romans
to gaze on the pyramids. And while he stayed long in Egypt, away from
his throne in Rome, all kinds of turmoil erupted throughout the Roman
Empire.
When Caesar was murdered, in 44 B.C., he was succeeded by a triumvi-
rate of rulers including Mark Antony, a brave soldier who loved pleasure
and spectacle and fancied himself a kind of Roman Dionysus. A few years
later, while Antony was in Syria, Cleopatra invited him to come meet her
in the Egyptian town of Tarsus. There—once she had made him wait for
her—her appearance was as startling in its way as her first before Caesar. A
magnificent gold barge with purple sails appeared on the river Cydnus. The
oarsmen rowed to the accompaniment of ethereal music; all around the
boat were beautiful young girls dressed as nymphs and mythological figures.
Cleopatra sat on deck, surrounded and fanned by cupids and posed as the
goddess Aphrodite, whose name the crowd chanted enthusiastically.
Like all of Cleopatra's victims, Antony felt mixed emotions. The exotic
pleasures she offered were hard to resist. But he also wanted to tame her—to
defeat this proud and illustrious woman would prove his greatness. And so
he stayed, and, like Caesar, fell slowly under her spell. She indulged him in
all of his weaknesses—gambling, raucous parties, elaborate rituals, lavish
spectacles. To get him to come back to Rome, Octavius, another member of
the Roman triumvirate, offered him a wife: Octavius's own sister, Octavia,
one of the most beautiful women in Rome. Known for her virtue and
goodness, she could surely keep Antony away from the "Egyptian whore."
The ploy worked for a while, but Antony was unable to forget Cleopatra,
and after three years he went back to her. This time it was for good: he had
in essence become Cleopatra's slave, granting her immense powers, adopting
Egyptian dress and customs, and renouncing the ways of Rome.
Only one image of Cleopatra survives—a barely visible profile on a coin—
but we have numerous written descriptions. She had a long thin face and a
somewhat pointed nose; her dominant features were her wonderfully large
eyes. Her seductive power, however, did not lie in her looks—indeed many
among the women of Alexandria were considered more beautiful than she.
What she did have above all other women was the ability to distract a man.
In reality, Cleopatra was physically unexceptional and had no political
power, yet both Caesar and Antony, brave and clever men, saw none of
this. What they saw was a woman who constantly transformed herself be-
fore their eyes, a one-woman spectacle. Her dress and makeup changed
from day to day, but always gave her a heightened, goddesslike appearance.down upon them, and
broke into their liquid song.
• "Draw near," they sang,
"illustrious Odysseus,
flower of Achaean chivalry,
and bring your ship to rest
so that you may hear our
voices. No seaman ever
sailed his black ship past
this spot without listening
to the sweet tones that flow
from our lips . . ." • The
lovely voices came to me
across the water, and my
heart was filled with such a
longing to listen that with
nod and frown I signed to
my men to set me free.
—HOMER, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK
XII, TRANSLATED BY E.V. RIEU
The charm of [Cleopatra's]
presence was irresistible,
and there was an attraction
in her person and talk,
together with a peculiar
force of character, which
pervaded her every word
and action, and laid all
who associated with her
under its spell. It was a
delight merely to hear the
sound of her voice, with
which, like an instrument
of many strings, she could
pass from one language to
another.
—PLUTARCH, MAKERS OF
ROME, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
The immediate attraction
of a song, a voice, or scent.
The attraction of the
panther with his perfumed
scent . . . According to the
ancients, the panther is
the only animal who emits
a perfumed odor. It uses
this scent to draw and
capture its victims. . . .
But what is it that seduces
in a scent? . . . What is it
in the song of the Sirens
that seduces us, or in the
beauty of a face, in the depthsThe Siren • 9
Her voice, which all writers talk of, was lilting and intoxicating. Her words
could be banal enough, but were spoken so sweetly that listeners would
find themselves remembering not what she said but how she said it.
Cleopatra provided constant variety—tributes, mock battles, expedi-
tions, costumed orgies. Everything had a touch of drama and was accom-
plished with great energy. By the time your head lay on the pillow beside
her, your mind was spinning with images and dreams. And just when you
thought you had this fluid, larger-than-life woman, she would turn distant
or angry, making it clear that everything was on her terms. You never pos-
sessed Cleopatra, you worshiped her. In this way a woman who had been
exiled and destined for an early death managed to turn it all around and
rule Egypt for close to twenty years.
From Cleopatra we learn that it is not beauty that makes a Siren but
rather a theatrical streak that allows a woman to embody a man's fantasies.
A man grows bored with a woman, no matter how beautiful; he yearns for
different pleasures, and for adventure. All a woman needs to turn this
around is to create the illusion that she offers such variety and adventure. A
man is easily deceived by appearances; he has a weakness for the visual.
Create the physical presence of a Siren (heightened sexual allure mixed
with a regal and theatrical manner) and he is trapped. He cannot grow
bored with you yet he cannot discard you. Keep up the distractions, and
never let him see who you really are. He will follow you until he drowns.
The Sex Siren
Norma Jean Mortensen, the future Marilyn Monroe, spent part of her
childhood in Los Angeles orphanages. Her days were filled with
chores and no play. At school, she kept to herself, smiled rarely, and
dreamed a lot. One day when she was thirteen, as she was dressing for
school, she noticed that the white blouse the orphanage provided for her
was torn, so she had to borrow a sweater from a younger girl in the house.
The sweater was several sizes too small. That day, suddenly, boys seemed to
gather around her wherever she went (she was extremely well-developed
for her age). She wrote in her diary, "They stared at my sweater as if it were
a gold mine."
The revelation was simple but startling. Previously ignored and even
ridiculed by the other students, Norma Jean now sensed a way to gain at-
tention, maybe even power, for she was wildly ambitious. She started to
smile more, wear makeup, dress differently. And soon she noticed some-
thing equally startling: without her having to say or do anything, boys fell
passionately in love with her. "My admirers all said the same thing in differ-
ent ways," she wrote. "It was my fault, their wanting to kiss me and hug
me. Some said it was the way I looked at them—with eyes full of passion.
Others said it was my voice that lured them on. Still others said I gave off
vibrations that floored them."of an abyss . . . ?
Seduction lies in the
annulment of signs and
their meaning, in pure
appearance. The eyes that
seduce have no meaning,
they end in the gaze, as
the face with makeup
ends in only pure
appearance. . . . The scent
of the panther is also a
meaningless message—and
behind the message the
panther is invisible, as is
the woman beneath her
makeup. The Sirens too
remained unseen. The
enchantment lies in what
is hidden.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD, DE LA
SÉDUCTION
We're dazzled by feminine
adornment, by the surface,
\ All gold and jewels: so
little of what we observe \
Is the girl herself And
where (you may ask) amid
such plenty \ Can our
object of passion be found?
The eye's deceived \ By
Love's smart camouflage.
—OVID, CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
He was herding his cattle
on Mount Gargarus, the
highest peak of Ida, when
Hermes, accompanied by
Hera, Athene, and
Aphrodite delivered the
golden apple and Zeus's
message: "Paris, since you
are as handsome as you are
wise in affairs of the heart,
Zeus commands you to
judge which of these
goddesses is the fairest. " •
"So be it," sighed Paris.
"But first I beg the losers
not to be vexed with me. I
am only a human being,
liable to make the stupidest10 • The Art of Seduction
A few years later Marilyn was trying to make it in the film business.
Producers would tell her the same thing: she was attractive enough in per-
son, but her face wasn't pretty enough for the movies. She was getting
work as an extra, and when she was on-screen—even if only for a few sec-
onds—the men in the audience would go wild, and the theaters would
erupt in catcalls. But nobody saw any star quality in this. One day in 1949,
only twenty-three at the time and her career at a standstill, Monroe met
someone at a diner who told her that a producer casting a new Groucho
Marx movie, Love Happy, was looking for an actress for the part of a blond
bombshell who could walk by Groucho in a way that would, in his words,
"arouse my elderly libido and cause smoke to issue from my ears." Talking
her way into an audition, she improvised this walk. "It's Mae West, Theda
Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one," said Groucho after watching her
saunter by. "We shoot the scene tomorrow morning." And so Marilyn cre-
ated her infamous walk, a walk that was hardly natural but offered a strange
mix of innocence and sex.
Over the next few years, Marilyn taught herself through trial and er-
ror how to heighten the effect she had on men. Her voice had always been
attractive—it was the voice of a little girl. But on film it had limitations un-
til someone finally taught her to lower it, giving it the deep, breathy tones
that became her seductive trademark, a mix of the little girl and the vixen.
Before appearing on set, or even at a party, Marilyn would spend hours be-
fore the mirror. Most people assumed this was vanity—she was in love with
her image. The truth was that image took hours to create. Marilyn spent
years studying and practicing the art of makeup. The voice, the walk, the
face and look were all constructions, an act. At the height of her fame, she
would get a thrill by going into bars in New York City without her makeup
or glamorous clothes and passing unnoticed.
Success finally came, but with it came something deeply annoying to
her: the studios would only cast her as the blond bombshell. She wanted se-
rious roles, but no one took her seriously for those parts, no matter how
hard she downplayed the siren qualities she had built up. One day, while she
was rehearsing a scene from The Cherry Orchard, her acting instructor, Mi-
chael Chekhov, asked her, "Were you thinking of sex while we played the
scene?" When she said no, he continued, "All through our playing of the
scene I kept receiving sex vibrations from you. As if you were a woman in
the grip of passion. ... I understand your problem with your studio now,
Marilyn. You are a woman who gives off sex vibrations—no matter what
you are doing or thinking. The whole world has already responded to those
vibrations. They come off the movie screens when you are on them."
Marilyn Monroe loved the effect her body could have on the male libido.
She tuned her physical presence like an instrument, making herself reek of
sex and gaining a glamorous, larger-than-life appearance. Other women
knew just as many tricks for heightening their sexual appeal, but what sepa-
rated Marilyn from them was an unconscious element. Her backgroundmistakes." • The
goddesses all agreed to
abide by his decision. •
"Will it be enough to
judge them as they are?"
Paris asked Hermes, "or
should they he naked?" •
"The rules of the contest
are for you to decide,"
Hermes answered with a
discreet smile. • "In that
case, will they kindly
disrobe?" • Hermes told
the goddesses to do so, and
politely turned his back. •
Aphrodite was soon ready,
but Athene insisted that
she should remove the
famous magic girdle, which
gave her an unfair
advantage by making
everyone fall in love
withthe wearer. "Very
well" said Aphrodite
spitefully. "I will, on
condition that you remove
your helmet—you look
hideous without it. " •
"Now, if you please, 1
must judge you one at
a time" announced
Paris. . . . Come here,
Divine Hera! Will you
other two goddesses be good
enough to leave us for a
while?" • "Examine me
conscientiously," said Hera,
turning slowly around, and
displaying her magnificent
figure, "and remember that
if you judge me the fairest,
1 will make you lord of all
Asia, and the richest man
alive. " • "I am not to be
bribed my Lady . . . Very
well, thank you. Now I
have seen all that I need to
see. Come, Divine
Athene!" • "Here I am,"
said Athene, striding
purposefully forward.
"Listen, Paris, if you have
enough common sense to
award me the prize, I will
make you victorious in
all your battles, as well
as the handsomest and
wisest man in the world."
• "I am a humbleThe Siren • 11
had deprived her of something critical: affection. Her deepest need was to
feel loved and desired, which made her seem constantly vulnerable, like a
little girl craving protection. She emanated this need for love before the
camera; it was effortless, coming from somewhere real and deep inside. A
look or gesture that she did not intend to arouse desire would do so doubly
powerfully just because it was unintended—its innocence was precisely
what excited a man.
The Sex Siren has a more urgent and immediate effect than the Spec-
tacular Siren does. The incarnation of sex and desire, she does not bother
to appeal to extraneous senses, or to create a theatrical buildup. Her time
never seems to be taken up by work or chores; she gives the impression that
she lives for pleasure and is always available. What separates the Sex Siren
from the courtesan or whore is her touch of innocence and vulnerability.
The mix is perversely satisfying: it gives the male the critical illusion that he
is a protector, the father figure, although it is actually the Sex Siren who
controls the dynamic.
A woman doesn't have to be born with the attributes of a Marilyn
Monroe to fill the role of the Sex Siren. Most of the physical elements are
a construction; the key is the air of schoolgirl innocence. While one part of
you seems to scream sex, the other part is coy and naive, as if you were in-
capable of understanding the effect you are having. Your walk, your voice,
your manner are delightfully ambiguous—you are both the experienced,
desiring woman and the innocent gamine.
Your next encounter will be with the Sirens, who bewitch
every man that approaches them. . . . For with the music
of their song the Sirens cast their spell upon him, as they
sit there in a meadow piled high with the moldering skele-
tons of men, whose withered skin still hangs upon their
bones.
—CIRCE TO ODYSSEUS, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK XII
Keys to the Character
The Siren is the most ancient seductress of them all. Her prototype is
the goddess Aphrodite—it is her nature to have a mythic quality about
her—but do not imagine she is a thing of the past, or of legend and his-
tory: she represents a powerful male fantasy of a highly sexual, supremely
confident, alluring female offering endless pleasure and a bit of danger. In
today's world this fantasy can only appeal the more strongly to the male
psyche, for now more than ever he lives in a world that circumscribes his
aggressive instincts by making everything safe and secure, a world that offers
less chance for adventure and risk than ever before. In the past, a man had
some outlets for these drives—warfare, the high seas, political intrigue. In
the sexual realm, courtesans and mistresses were practically a social institu-herdsman, not a soldier,"
said Paris. . . . "But I
promise to consider fairly
your claim to the apple.
Now you are at liberty to
put on your clothes and
helmet again. Is Aphrodite
ready?" • Aphrodite sidled
up to him, and Paris
blushed because she came
so close that they were
almost touching. • "Look
carefully, please, pass
nothing over. . . . By the
way, as soon as I saw you,
I said to myself: 'Upon my
word, there goes the
handsomest young man in
Phrygia! Why does he
waste himself here in the
wilderness herding stupid
cattle?' Well, why do you,
Paris? Why not move into
a city and lead a civilized
life? What have you to lose
by marrying someone like
Helen of Sparta, who is as
beautiful as I am, and no
less passionate? . . . I
suggest now that you tour
Greece with my son Eros
as your guide. Once you
reach Sparta, he and I will
see that Helen falls head
over heels in love with
you." • "Would you swear
to that?" Paris ashed
excitedly. • Aphrodite
uttered a solemn oath, and
Paris, without a second
thought, awarded her the
golden apple.
—ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME I12 • The Art of Seduction
tion, and offered him the variety and the chase that he craved. Without any
outlets, his drives turn inward and gnaw at him, becoming all the more
volatile for being repressed. Sometimes a powerful man will do the most ir-
rational things, have an affair when it is least called for, just for a thrill, the
danger of it all. The irrational can prove immensely seductive, even more
so for men, who must always seem so reasonable.
If it is seductive power you are after, the Siren is the most potent of all.
She operates on a man's most basic emotions, and if she plays her role prop-
erly, she can transform a normally strong and responsible male into a child-
ish slave. The Siren operates well on the rigid masculine type—the soldier
or hero—just as Cleopatra overwhelmed Mark Antony and Marilyn Mon-
roe Joe DiMaggio. But never imagine that these are the only types the
Siren can affect. Julius Caesar was a writer and thinker, who had transferred
his intellectual abilities onto the battlefield and into the political arena; the
playwright Arthur Miller fell as deeply under Monroe's spell as DiMaggio.
The intellectual is often the one most susceptible to the Siren call of pure
physical pleasure, because his life so lacks it. The Siren does not have to
worry about finding the right victim. Her magic works on one and all.
First and foremost, a Siren must distinguish herself from other women.
She is by nature a rare thing, mythic, only one to a group; she is also a valu-
able prize to be wrested away from other men. Cleopatra made herself dif-
ferent through her sense of high drama; the Empress Josephine Bonaparte's
device was her extreme languorousness; Marilyn Monroe's was her little-
girl quality. Physicality offers the best opportunities here, since a Siren is
preeminently a sight to behold. A highly feminine and sexual presence,
even to the point of caricature, will quickly differentiate you, since most
women lack the confidence to project such an image.
Once the Siren has made herself stand out from others, she must have
two other critical qualities: the ability to get the male to pursue her so
feverishly that he loses control; and a touch of the dangerous. Danger is
surprisingly seductive. To get the male to pursue you is relatively simple: a
highly sexual presence will do this quite well. But you must not resemble a
courtesan or whore, whom the male may pursue only to quickly lose inter-
est in her. Instead, you are slightly elusive and distant, a fantasy come to life.
During the Renaissance, the great Sirens, such as Tullia d'Aragona, would
act and look like Grecian goddesses—the fantasy of the day. Today you
might model yourself on a film goddess—anything that seems larger than
life, even awe inspiring. These qualities will make a man chase you vehe-
mently, and the more he chases, the more he will feel that he is acting on
his own initiative. This is an excellent way of disguising how deeply you
are manipulating him.
The notion of danger, challenge, sometimes death, might seem out-
dated, but danger is critical in seduction. It adds emotional spice and is
particularly appealing to men today, who are normally so rational and re-
pressed. Danger is present in the original myth of the Siren. In Homer's
Odyssey, the hero Odysseus must sail by the rocks where the Sirens, strangeTo whom aw I compare
the lovely girl, so blessed by
fortune, if not to the
Sirens, who with their
lodestone draw the ships
towards them? Thus, I
imagine, did Isolde attract
many thoughts and hearts
that deemed themselves
safe from love's
disquietude. And indeed
these two—anchorless
ships and stray thoughts—
provide a good comparison.
They are both so seldom
on a straight course, lie so
often in unsure havens,
pitching and tossing and
heaving to and fro. Just so,
in the same way, do
aimless desire and random
love-longing drift like an
anchorless ship. This
charming young princess,
discreet and courteous
Isolde, drew thoughts from
the hearts that enshrined
them as a lodestone draws
in ships to the sound of the
Sirens' song. She sang
openly and secretly, in
through ears and eyes to
where many a heart was
stirred. The song which she
sang openly in this and
other places was her own
sweet singing and soft
sounding of strings that
echoed for all to hear
through the kingdom of the
ears deep down into the
heart. But her secret song
was her wondrous beauty
that stole with its rapturous
music hidden and unseen
through the windows of the
eyes into many noble
hearts and smoothed on the
magic which took thoughts
prisoner suddenly, and,
taking them, fettered them
with desire!
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY
A.T. HATTOThe Siren • 13
female creatures, sing and beckon sailors to their destruction. They sing of
the glories of the past, of a world like childhood, without responsibilities, a
world of pure pleasure. Their voices are like water, liquid and inviting.
Sailors would leap into the water to join them, and drown; or, distracted
and entranced, they would steer their ship into the rocks. To protect his
sailors from the Sirens, Odysseus has their ears filled with wax; he himself is
tied to the mast, so he can both hear the Sirens and live to tell of it—a
strange desire, since the thrill of the Sirens is giving in to the temptation to
follow them.
Just as the ancient sailors had to row and steer, ignoring all distractions,
a man today must work and follow a straight path in life. The call of some-
thing dangerous, emotional, unknown is all the more powerful because it is
so forbidden. Think of the victims of the great Sirens of history: Paris
causes a war for the sake of Helen of Troy, Caesar risks an empire and
Antony loses his power and his life for Cleopatra, Napoleon becomes a
laughingstock over Josephine, DiMaggio never gets over Marilyn, and
Arthur Miller can't write for years. A man is often ruined by a Siren, yet
cannot tear himself away. (Many powerful men have a masochistic streak.)
An element of danger is easy to hint at, and will enhance your other Siren
characteristics—the touch of madness in Marilyn, for example, that pulled
men in. Sirens are often fantastically irrational, which is immensely attrac-
tive to men who are oppressed by their own reasonableness. An element of
fear is also critical: keeping a man at a proper distance creates respect, so
that he doesn't get close enough to see through you or notice your weaker
qualities. Create such fear by suddenly changing your moods, keeping the
man off balance, occasionally intimidating him with capricious behavior.
The most important element for an aspiring Siren is always the physical,
the Siren's main instrument of power. Physical qualities—a scent, a height-
ened femininity evoked through makeup or through elaborate or seductive
clothing—act all the more powerfully on men because they have no mean-
ing. In their immediacy they bypass rational processes, having the same ef-
fect that a decoy has on an animal, or the movement of a cape on a bull.
The proper Siren appearance is often confused with physical beauty, par-
ticularly the face. But a beautiful face does not a Siren make: instead it cre-
ates too much distance and coldness. (Neither Cleopatra nor Marilyn
Monroe, the two greatest Sirens in history, were known for their beautiful
faces.) Although a smile and an inviting look are infinitely seductive, they
must never dominate your appearance. They are too obvious and direct.
The Siren must stimulate a generalized desire, and the best way to do this is
by creating an overall impression that is both distracting and alluring. It is
not one particular trait, but a combination of qualities:
The voice. Clearly a critical quality, as the legend indicates, the Siren's
voice has an immediate animal presence with incredible suggestive power.
Perhaps that power is regressive, recalling the ability of the mother's voiceFalling in love with statues
and paintings, even
making love to them is an
ancient fantasy, one of
which the Renaissance was
keenly aware. Giorgio
Vasari, writing in the
introductory section of the
Lives about art in
antiquity, tells how men
violated the laws, going
into the temples at night
and making love with
statues of Venus. In the
morning, priests would
enter the sanctuaries to find
stains on the marble
figures.
—LYNNE LAWNER,
LIVES OF THE COURTESANS14 • The Art of Seduction
to calm or excite her child even before the child understood what she was
saying. The Siren must have an insinuating voice that hints at the erotic,
more often subliminally than overtly. Almost everyone who met Cleopatra
commented on her delightful, sweet-sounding voice, which had a mesmer-
izing quality. The Empress Josephine, one of the great seductresses of the
late eighteenth century, had a languorous voice that men found exotic, and
suggestive of her Creole origins. Marilyn Monroe was born with her
breathy, childlike voice, but she learned to lower to make it truly seductive.
Lauren Bacall's voice is naturally low; its seductive power comes from its
slow, suggestive delivery. The Siren never speaks quickly, aggressively, or at
a high pitch. Her voice is calm and unhurried, as if she had never quite
woken up—or left her bed.
Body and adornment. If the voice must lull, the body and its adornment
must dazzle. It is with her clothes that the Siren aims to create the god-
dess effect that Baudelaire described in his essay "In Praise of Makeup":
"Woman is well within her rights, and indeed she is accomplishing a kind
of duty in striving to appear magical and supernatural. She must astonish
and bewitch; an idol, she must adorn herself with gold in order to be
adored. She must borrow from all of the arts in order to raise herself above
nature, the better to subjugate hearts and stir souls."
A Siren who was a genius of clothes and adornment was Pauline Bona-
parte, sister of Napoleon. Pauline consciously strove for a goddess effect,
fashioning hair, makeup, and clothes to evoke the look and air of Venus,
the goddess of love. No one in history could boast a more extensive and
elaborate wardrobe. Pauline's entrance at a ball in 1798 created an astound-
ing effect. She asked the hostess, Madame Permon, if she could dress at her
house, so no one would see her clothes as she came in. When she came
down the stairs, everyone stopped dead in stunned silence. She wore the
headdress of a bacchante—clusters of gold grapes interlaced in her hair,
which was done up in the Greek style. Her Greek tunic, with its gold-
embroidered hem, showed off her goddesslike figure. Below her breasts was
a girdle of burnished gold, held by a magnificent jewel. "No words can
convey the loveliness of her appearance," wrote the Duchess d'Abrantes.
"The very room grew brighter as she entered. The whole ensemble was so
harmonious that her appearance was greeted with a buzz of admiration
which continued with utter disregard of all the other women."
The key: everything must dazzle, but must also be harmonious, so that
no single ornament draws attention. Your presence must be charged, larger
than life, a fantasy come true. Ornament is used to cast a spell and distract.
The Siren can also use clothing to hint at the sexual, at times overtly but
more often by suggesting it rather than screaming it—that would make you
seem manipulative. Related to this is the notion of selective disclosure, the
revealing of only a part of the body—but a part that will excite and stir the
imagination. In the late sixteenth century, Marguerite de Valois, the infa-The Siren • 15
mous daughter of Queen Catherine de Médicis of France, was one of the
first women ever to incorporate decolletage in her wardrobe, simply be-
cause she had the most beautiful breasts in the realm. For Josephine Bona-
parte it was her arms, which she carefully always left bare.
Movement and demeanor. In the fifth century B.C., King Kou Chien
chose the Chinese Siren Hsi Shih from among all the women of his realm
to seduce and destroy his rival Fu Chai, King of Wu; for this purpose, he
had the young woman instructed in the arts of seduction. Most important
of these was movement—how to move gracefully and suggestively. Hsi
Shih learned to give the impression of floating across the floor in her court
robes. When she was finally unleashed on Fu Chai, he quickly fell under
her spell. She walked and moved like no one he had ever seen. He became
obsessed with her tremulous presence, her manner and nonchalant air. Fu
Chai fell so deeply in love that he let his kingdom fall to pieces, allowing
Kou Chien to march in and conquer it without a fight.
The Siren moves gracefully and unhurriedly. The proper gestures,
movement, and demeanor for a Siren are like the proper voice: they hint at
something exciting, stirring desire without being obvious. Your air must be
languorous, as if you had all the time in the world for love and pleasure.
Your gestures must have a certain ambiguity, suggesting something both
innocent and erotic. Anything that cannot immediately be understood is
supremely seductive, and all the more so if it permeates your manner.
Symbol: Water.
The song of the Siren is liquid and
enticing, and the Siren herself is fluid and un-
graspable. Like the sea, the Siren lures you with the
promise of infinite adventure and pleasure. Forgetting past
and future, men follow her far out to sea, where they drown.16 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
No matter how enlightened the age, no woman can maintain the image
of being devoted to pleasure completely comfortably. And no matter
how hard she tries to distance herself from it, the taint of being easy always
follows the Siren. Cleopatra was hated in Rome as the Egyptian whore.
That hatred eventually lead to her downfall, as Octavius and the Roman
army sought to extirpate the stain on Roman manhood that she came to
represent. Even so, men are often forgiving when it comes to the Siren's
reputation. But danger often lies in the envy she stirs up among other
women; much of Rome's hatred for Cleopatra originated in the resentment
she provoked among the city's stern matrons. By playing up her innocence,
by making herself seem the victim of male desire, the Siren can somewhat
blunt the effects of feminine envy. But on the whole there is little she can
do—her power comes from her effect on men, and she must learn to ac-
cept, or ignore, the envy of other women.
Finally, the intense attention that the Siren attracts can prove irritating
and worse. Sometimes she will pine for relief from it; sometimes, too, she
will want to attract an attention that is not sexual. Also, unfortunately,
physical beauty fades; although the Siren effect depends not on a beautiful
face but on an overall impression, past a certain age that impression gets
hard to project. Both of these factors contributed to the suicide of Marilyn
Monroe. It takes a genius on the level of Madame de Pompadour, the Siren
mistress of King Louis XV, to make the transition into the role of the spir-
ited older woman who continues to seduce with her nonphysical charms.
Cleopatra had such an intellect, and had she lived long enough, she would
have remained a potent seductress for many years. The Siren must prepare
for age by paying attention early on to the more psychological, less physical
forms of coquetry that can continue to bring her power once her beauty
starts to fade.A woman
never quite feels desired and appreciated
enough. She wants attention, but a man is too often
distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy
figure—when he desires a woman, brief though that moment may be,
he will go to the ends of the earth for her. He may be disloyal, dishonest,
and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Unlike the normal, cautious
male, the Rake is delightfully unrestrained, a slave to his love of women.
There is the added lure of his reputation: so many women have suc-
cumbed to him, there has to be a reason. Words are a woman's weak-
ness, and the Rake is a master of seductive language. Stir a
woman's repressed longings by adapting the Rake's
mix of danger and pleasure.The Ardent Rake
For the court of Louis XIV, the king's last years were gloomy—he was
old, and had become both insufferably religious and personally unpleas-
ant. The court was bored and desperate for novelty. So in 1710, the arrival
of a fifteen-year-old lad who was both devilishly handsome and charming
had a particularly strong effect on the ladies. His name was Fronsac, the
future Duke de Richelieu (his granduncle being the infamous Cardinal
Richelieu). He was impudent and witty. The ladies would play with him
like a toy, but he would kiss them on the lips in return, his hands wandering
far for an inexperienced boy. When those hands strayed up the skirts of a
duchess who was not so indulgent, the king was furious, and sent the youth
to the Bastille to teach him a lesson. But the ladies who had found him so
amusing could not endure his absence. Compared to the stiffs in court, here
was someone incredibly bold, his eyes boring into you, his hands quicker
than was safe. Nothing could stop him, his novelty was irresistible. The
court ladies pleaded and his stay in the Bastille was cut short.
Several years later, the young Mademoiselle de Valois was walking in a
Paris park with her chaperone, an older woman who never left her side. De
Valois's father, the Duke d'Orléans, was determined to protect her, his
youngest daughter, from all the court seducers until she could be married
off, so he had attached to her this chaperone, a woman of impeccable
virtue and sourness. In the park, however, de Valois saw a young man who
gave her a look that set her heart on fire. He walked on by, but the look was
intense and clear. It was her chaperone who told her his name: the now in-
famous Duke de Richelieu, blasphemer, seducer, heartbreaker. Someone to
avoid at all cost.
A few days later, the chaperone took de Valois to a different park, and
lo and behold, Richelieu crossed their path again. This time he was in dis-
guise, dressed as a beggar, but the look in his eye was unforgettable. Made-
moiselle de Valois returned his gaze: at last something exciting in her drab
life. Given her father's sternness, no man had dared approach her. And now
this notorious courtier was pursuing her, instead of all the other ladies at
court—what a thrill! Soon he was smuggling beautifully written notes to
her expressing his uncontrollable desire for her. She responded timidly, but
soon the notes were all she was living for. In one of them he promised to
arrange everything if she would spend the night with him; imagining it was[After an accident at sect,
Don Juan finds himself
washed up on a beach,
where he is discovered by a
young woman.] • TISBEA:
Wake up, handsomest of
all men, and be yourself
again. • DON JUAN: If the
sea gives me death, you
give me life. But the sea
really saved me only to be
killed by you. Oh the sea
tosses me from one torment
to the other, for I no sooner
pulled myself from the
water than I met this
siren—yourself. Why fill
my ears with wax, since
you kill me with your
eyes? I was dying in the
sea, but from today I shall
die of love. • TISBEA: YOU
have abundant breath for a
man almost drowned. You
suffered much, but who
knows what suffering you
are preparing for me? . . .
I found you at my feet all
water, and now you are all
fire. If you burn when you
are so wet, what will you
do when you're dry again?
You promise a scorching
flame; I hope to God
you're not lying. • DON
JUAN: Dear girl, God
should have drowned me
before I could be charred by
you. Perhaps love was wise
1920 • The Art of Seduction
impossible to bring such a thing to pass, she did not mind playing along and
agreeing to his bold proposal.
Mademoiselle de Valois had a chambermaid named Angelique, who
dressed her for bed and slept in an adjoining room. One night as the chap-
erone was knitting, de Valois looked up from the book she was reading to
see Angelique carrying her mistress's nightclothes to her room, but for some
strange reason Angelique looked back at her and smiled—it was Richelieu,
expertly dressed as the maid! De Valois nearly gasped from fright, but caught
herself, realizing the danger she was in: if she said anything her family
would find out about the notes, and about her part in the whole affair.
What could she do? She decided to go to her room and talk the young
duke out of his ridiculously dangerous maneuver. She said good night to her
chaperone, but once she was in her bedroom, the words she had planned
were useless. When she tried to reason with Richelieu, he responded with
that look in his eye, and then with his arms around her. She could not yell,
but now she was unsure what to do. His impetuous words, his caresses, the
danger of it all—her head was whirling, she was lost. What was virtue and
her prior boredom compared to an evening with the court's most notorious
rake? So while the chaperone knitted away, the duke initiated her into the
rituals of libertinage.
Months later, de Valois's father had reason to suspect that Richelieu had
broken through his lines of defense. The chaperone was fired, the precau-
tions were doubled. D'Orléans did not realize that to Richelieu such mea-
sures were a challenge, and he lived for challenges. He bought the house
next door under an assumed name and secretly tunneled a trapdoor through
the wall adjoining the duke's kitchen cupboard. In this cupboard, over the
next few months—until the novelty wore off—de Valois and Richelieu en-
joyed endless trysts.
Everyone in Paris knew of Richelieu's exploits, for he made it a point
to publicize them as loudly as possible. Every week a new story would cir-
culate through the court. A husband had locked his wife in an upstairs
room at night, worried the duke was after her; to reach her the duke had
crawled in darkness along a thin wooden plank suspended between two
upper-floor windows. Two women who lived in the same house, one a
widow, the other married and quite religious, had discovered to their mu-
tual horror that the duke was having an affair with both of them at the
same time, leaving one in the middle of the night to be with the other.
When they confronted him, the duke, always on the prowl for something
novel, and a devilish talker, had neither apologized nor backed down, but
proceeded to talk them into a menage a trois, playing on the wounded
vanity of each woman, who could not stand the thought of him preferring
the other. Year after year, the stories of his remarkable seductions spread.
One woman admired his audacity and bravery, another his gallantry in
thwarting a husband. Women competed for his attention: if he did not
want to seduce you, there had to be something wrong with you. To be the
target of his attentions became a great fantasy. At one point two ladiesto drench me before I felt
your scalding touch. But
your fire is such that even
in water I burn. • TISBEA:
So cold and yet burning? •
DON JUAN: So much fire
is in you. • TISBEA: How
well you talk! • DON
JUAN: How well you
understand! • TISBEA: I
hope to God you're not
lying.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA, THE
PLAYBOY OF SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
MANDEL
Pleased with my first
success, I determined to
profit by this happy
reconciliation. I called them
my dear wives, my faithful
companions, the two beings
chosen to make me happy.
I sought to turn their
heads, and to rouse in
them desires the strength of
which I knew and which
would drive away any
reflections contrary to my
plans. The skillful man
who knows how to
communicate gradually the
heat of love to the senses of
the most virtuous woman
is quite certain of soon
being absolute master of
her mind and her person;
you cannot reflect when
you have lost your head;
and, moreover, principles of
wisdom, however deeply
engraved they may be on
the mind, are effaced in
that moment when the
heart yearns only for
pleasure: pleasure alone
then commands and is
obeyed. The man who has
had experience of conquests
nearly always succeeds
where he who is only timid
and in love fails. . . . •
When I had brought my
two belles to the state of
abandonment in which IThe Rake • 21
fought a pistol duel over the duke, and one of them was seriously
wounded. The Duchess d'Orléans, Richelieu's most bitter enemy, once
wrote, "If I believed in sorcery I should think that the Duke possessed
some supernatural secret, for I have never known a woman to oppose the
very least resistance to him."
In seduction there is often a dilemma: to seduce you need planning and cal-
culation, but if your victim suspects that you have ulterior motives, she will
grow defensive. Furthermore, if you seem to be in control, you will inspire
fear instead of desire. The Ardent Rake solves this dilemma in the most art-
ful manner. Of course he must calculate and plan—he has to find a way
around the jealous husband, or whatever the obstacle is. It is exhausting
work. But by nature, the Ardent Rake also has the advantage of an uncon-
trollable libido. When he pursues a woman, he really is aglow with desire;
the victim senses this and is inflamed, even despite herself. How can she
imagine that he is a heartless seducer who will abandon her when he so ar-
dently braves all dangers and obstacles to get to her? And even if she is
aware of his rakish past, of his incorrigible amorality, it doesn't matter, be-
cause she also sees his weakness. He cannot control himself; he actually is a
slave to all women. As such he inspires no fear.
The Ardent Rake teaches us a simple lesson: intense desire has a dis-
tracting power on a woman, just as the Siren's physical presence does on a
man. A woman is often defensive and can sense insincerity or calculation.
But if she feels consumed by your attentions, and is confident you will do
anything for her, she will notice nothing else about you, or will find a way
to forgive your indiscretions. This is the perfect cover for a seducer. The
key is to show no hesitation, to abandon all restraint, to let yourself go, to
show that you cannot control yourself and are fundamentally weak. Do not
worry about inspiring mistrust; as long as you are the slave to her charms,
she will not think of the aftermath.
The Demonic Rake
In the early 1880s, members of Roman high society began to talk of a
young journalist who had arrived on the scene, a certain Gabriele D'An-
nunzio. This was strange in itself, for Italian royalty had only the deepest
contempt for anyone outside their circle, and a newspaper society reporter
was almost as low as you could go. Indeed well-born men paid D'Annun-
zio little attention. He had no money and few connections, coming from a
strictly middle-class background. Besides, to them he was downright
ugly—short and stocky, with a dark, splotchy complexion and bulging eyes.
The men thought him so unappealing they gladly let him mingle with their
wives and daughters, certain that their women would be safe with this gar-
goyle and happy to get this gossip hunter off their hands. No, it was not the
men who talked of D'Annunzio; it was their wives.wanted them, I expressed a
more eager desire; their
eyes lit up; my caresses
were returned; and it was
plain that their resistance
would not delay for more
than a few moments the
next scene I desired them
to play. I proposed that
each should accompany me
in turn into a charming
closet, next to the room in
which we were, which I
wanted them to admire.
They both remained silent.
• "You hesitate?" I said to
them. "I will see which of
you is the more attached
to me. The one who loves
me the more will be the
first to follow the lover she
wishes to convince of her
affection. . . ." • I knew
my puritan, and I was well
aware that, after a few
Struggles, she gave herself
up completely to the
present moment. 'This one
appeared to be as agreeable
to her as the others we had
previously spent together;
she forgot that she was
sharing me [with Madame
Renaud]. ...• [When
her turn came] Madame
Renaud responded with a
transport that proved her
contentment, and she left
the sitting only after having
repeated continually:
"What a man! What a
man! He is astonishing!
How often you could be
happy with him if he were
only faithful!"
—THE PRIVATE LIFE OF THE
MARSHAL DUKE OF RICHELIEU,
TRANSLATED BY F. S. FLINT22 • The Art of Seduction
Introduced to D'Annunzio by their husbands, these duchesses and mar-
chionesses would find themselves entertaining this strange-looking man,
and when he was alone with them, his manner would suddenly change.
Within minutes these ladies would be spellbound. First, he had the most
magnificent voice they had ever heard—soft and low, each syllable articu-
lated, with a flowing rhythm and inflection that was almost musical. One
woman compared it to the ringing of church bells in the distance. Others
said his voice had a "hypnotic" effect. The words that voice spoke were in-
teresting as well—alliterative phrases, charming locutions, poetic images,
and a way of offering praise that could melt a woman's heart. D'Annunzio
had mastered the art of flattery. He seemed to know each woman's weak-
ness: one he would call a goddess of nature, another an incomparable artist
in the making, another a romantic figure out of a novel. A woman's heart
would flutter as he described the effect she had on him. Everything was
suggestive, hinting at sex or romance. That night she would ponder his
words, recalling little in particular that he had said, because he never said
anything concrete, but rather the feeling it had given her. The next day she
would receive from him a poem that seemed to have been written spe-
cifically for her. (In fact he wrote dozens of very similar poems, slightly
tailoring each one for its intended victim.)
A few years after D'Annunzio began work as a society reporter, he mar-
ried the daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Gallese. Shortly thereafter,
with the unshakeable support of society ladies, he began publishing novels
and books of poetry. The number of his conquests was remarkable, and
also the quality—not only marchionesses would fall at his feet, but great
artists, such as the actress Eleanor Duse, who helped him become a re-
spected dramatist and literary celebrity. The dancer Isadora Duncan, an-
other who eventually fell under his spell, explained his magic: "Perhaps the
most remarkable lover of our time is Gabriele D'Annunzio. And this
notwithstanding that he is small, bald, and, except when his face lights up
with enthusiasm, ugly But when he speaks to a woman he likes, his face is
transfigured, so that he suddenly becomes Apollo. . . . His effect on women
is remarkable. The lady he is talking to suddenly feels that her very soul and
being are lifted."
At the outbreak of World War I, the fifty-two-year-old D'Annunzio
joined the army. Although he had no military experience, he had a flair for
the dramatic and a burning desire to prove his bravery. He learned to fly
and led dangerous but highly effective missions. By the end of the war, he
was Italy's most decorated hero. His exploits made him a beloved national
figure, and after the war, crowds would gather outside his hotel wherever in
Italy he went. He would address them from a balcony, discussing politics,
railing against the current Italian government. A witness of one of these
speeches, the American writer Walter Starkie, was initially disappointed at
the appearance of the famous D'Annunzio on a balcony in Venice; he was
short, and looked grotesque. "Little by little, however, I began to sink under
the fascination of the voice, which penetrated into my consciousness. . . .His very successes in love,
even more than the
marvellous voice of this
little, bald seducer with a
nose like Punch, swept
along in his train a whole
procession of enamoured
women, both opulent and
tormented. D'Annunzio
had successfully revived the
Byronic legend: as he
passed by full-breasted
women, standing in his
way as Boldoni would
paint them, strings of
pearls anchoring them to
life—princesses and
actresses, great Russian
ladies and even middle-
class Bordeaux
housewives—they would
offer themselves up to him.
—PHILIPPE JULLIAN, PRINCE OF
AESTHETES: COUNT ROBERT
DE MONTESQUIEOU, TRANSLATED
BY JOHN HAYLOCK AND FRANCIS
KING
In short, nothing is so
sweet as to triumph over
the Resistance of a
beautiful Person; and in
that I have the Ambition
of Conquerors, who fly
perpetually from Victory to
Victory and can never
prevail with themselves to
put a bound to their
Wishes. Nothing can
restrain the Impetuosity of
my Desires; I have an
Heart for the whole Earth;
and like Alexander, I could
wish for New Worlds
wherein to extend my
Amorous Conquests.
—MOLIÈRE, DON JOHN OR
THE LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELLThe Rake • 23
Never a hurried, jerky gesture. . . . He played upon the emotions of the
crowd as a supreme violinist does upon a Stradivarius. The eyes of the
thousands were fixed upon him as though hypnotized by his power." Once
again, it was the sound of the voice and the poetic connotations of the
words that seduced the masses. Arguing that modern Italy should reclaim
the greatness of the Roman Empire, D'Annunzio would craft slogans for
the audience to repeat, or would ask emotionally loaded questions for them
to answer. He flattered the crowd, made them feel they were part of some
drama. Everything was vague and suggestive.
The issue of the day was the ownership of the city of Fiume, just across
the border in neighboring Yugoslavia. Many Italians believed that Italy's re-
ward for siding with the Allies in the recent war should be the annexation
of Fiume. D'Annunzio championed this cause, and because of his status as
a war hero the army was ready to side with him, although the government
opposed any action. In September of 1919, with soldiers rallying around
him, D'Annunzio led his infamous march on Fiume. When an Italian gen-
eral stopped him along the way, and threatened to shoot him, D'Annunzio
opened his coat to show his medals, and said in his magnetic voice, "If you
must kill me, fire first on this!" The general stood there stunned, then
broke into tears. He joined up with D'Annunzio.
When D'Annunzio entered Fiume, he was greeted as a liberator. The
next day he was declared leader of the Free State of Fiume. Soon he was
giving daily speeches from a balcony overlooking the town's main square,
holding tens of thousands of people spellbound without benefit of loud-
speakers. He initiated all kinds of celebrations and rituals harking back to
the Roman Empire. The citizens of Fiume began to imitate him, particu-
larly his sexual exploits; the city became like a giant bordello. His popu-
larity was so high that the Italian government feared a march on Rome,
which at that point, had D'Annunzio decided to do it—and he had the
support of a large part of the military—might actually have succeeded;
D'Annunzio could have beaten Mussolini to the punch and changed the
course of history. (He was not a Fascist, but a kind of aesthetic socialist.)
He decided to stay in Fiume, however, and ruled there for sixteen months
before the Italian government finally bombed him out of the city.
Seduction is a psychological process that transcends gender, except in a few
key areas where each gender has its own weakness. The male is traditionally
vulnerable to the visual. The Siren who can concoct the right physical ap-
pearance will seduce in large numbers. For women the weakness is lan-
guage and words: as was written by one of D'Annunzio's victims, the
French actress Simone, "How can one explain his conquests except by his
extraordinary verbal power, and the musical timbre of his voice, put to the
service of exceptional eloquence? For my sex is susceptible to words, be-
witched by them, longing to be dominated by them."
The Rake is as promiscuous with words as he is with women. He
chooses words for their ability to suggest, insinuate, hypnotize, elevate, in-Among the many modes of
handling Don Juan's effect
on women, the motif of the
irresistible hero is worth
singling out, for it
illustrates a curious change
in our sensibility. Don
Juan did not become
irresistible to women until
the Romantic age, and I
am disposed to think that
it is a trait of the female
imagination to make him
so. When the female voice
began to assert itself and
even, perhaps, to dominate
in literature, Don Juan
evolved to become the
women's rather than the
man's ideal. . . . Don
Juan is now the woman's
dream of the perfect lover,
fugitive, passionate, daring.
He gives her the one
unforgettable moment, the
magnificent exaltation of
the flesh which is too often
denied her by the real
husband, who thinks that
men are gross and women
spiritual. To be the fatal
Don Juan may be the
dream of a few men; but to
meet him is the dream of
many women.
—OSCAR MANDEL,"THE
LEGEND OF DON JUAN," THE
THEATRE OF DON JUAN24 • The Art of Seduction
feet. The words of the Rake are the equivalent of the bodily adornment of
the Siren: a powerful sensual distraction, a narcotic. The Rake's use of lan-
guage is demonic because it is designed not to communicate or convey in-
formation but to persuade, flatter, stir emotional turmoil, much as the
serpent in the Garden of Eden used words to lead Eve into temptation.
The example of D'Annunzio reveals the link between the erotic Rake,
who seduces women, and the political Rake, who seduces the masses. Both
depend on words. Adapt the character of the Rake and you will find that
the use of words as a subtle poison has infinite applications. Remember: it
is the form that matters, not the content. The less your targets focus on
what you say, and the more on how it makes them feel, the more seductive
your effect. Give your words a lofty, spiritual, literary flavor the better to in-
sinuate desire in your unwitting victims.
But what is this force, then, by which Don Juan seduces?
It is desire, the energy of sensuous desire. He desires in
every woman the whole of womanhood. The reaction to
this gigantic passion beautifies and develops the one de-
sired, who flushes in enhanced beauty by his reflection. As
the enthusiast's fire with seductive splendor illumines even
those who stand in a casual relation to him, so Don Juan
transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, EITHER/OR
Keys to the Character
At first it may seem strange that a man who is clearly dishonest, disloyal,
and has no interest in marriage would have any appeal to a woman.
But throughout all of history, and in all cultures, this type has had a fatal ef-
fect. What the Rake offers is what society normally does not allow women:
an affair of pure pleasure, an exciting brush with danger. A woman is often
deeply oppressed by the role she is expected to play She is supposed to be
the tender, civilizing force in society, and to want commitment and lifelong
loyalty. But often her marriages and relationships give her not romance and
devotion but routine and an endlessly distracted mate. It remains an abiding
female fantasy to meet a man who gives totally of himself, who lives for
her, even if only for a while.
This dark, repressed side of female desire found expression in the leg-
end of Don Juan. At first the legend was a male fantasy: the adventurous
knight who could have any woman he wanted. But in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, Don Juan slowly evolved from the masculine adven-
turer to a more feminized version: a man who lived only for women. This
evolution came from women's interest in the story, and was a result of their
frustrated desires. Marriage for them was a form of indentured servitude;
but Don Juan offered pleasure for its own sake, desire with no strings at-The Rake • 25
tached. For the time he crossed your path, you were all he thought about.
His desire for you was so powerful that he gave you no time to think or to
worry about the consequences. He would come in the night, give you an
unforgettable moment, and then vanish. He might have conquered a thou-
sand women before you, but that only made him more interesting; better to
be abandoned than undesired by such a man.
The great seducers do not offer the mild pleasures that society con-
dones. They touch a person's unconscious, those repressed desires that cry
out for liberation. Do not imagine that women are the tender creatures that
some people would like them to be. Like men, they are deeply attracted to
the forbidden, the dangerous, even the slightly evil. (Don Juan ends by go-
ing to hell, and the word "rake" comes from "rakehell," a man who rakes
the coals of hell; the devilish component, clearly, is an important part of
the fantasy.) Always remember: if you are to play the Rake, you must con-
vey a sense of risk and darkness, suggesting to your victim that she is partici-
pating in something rare and thrilling—a chance to play out her own rakish
desires.
To play the Rake, the most obvious requirement is the ability to let
yourself go, to draw a woman into the kind of purely sensual moment in
which past and future lose meaning. You must be able to abandon yourself
to the moment. (When the Rake Valmont—a character modeled after the
Duke de Richelieu—in Laclos' eighteenth-century novel Dangerous Liaisons
writes letters that are obviously calculated to have a certain effect on his
chosen victim, Madame de Tourvel, she sees right through them; but when
his letters really do burn with passion, she begins to relent.) An added
benefit of this quality is that it makes you seem unable to control yourself, a
display of weakness that a woman enjoys. By abandoning yourself to the
seduced, you make them feel that you exist for them alone—a feeling re-
flecting a truth, though a temporary one. Of the hundreds of women that
Pablo Picasso, consummate rake, seduced over the years, most of them had
the feeling that they were the only one he truly loved.
The Rake never worries about a woman's resistance to him, or for that
matter about any other obstacle in his path—a husband, a physical barrier.
Resistance is only the spur to his desire, enflaming him all the more. When
Picasso was seducing Françoise Gilot, in fact, he begged her to resist; he
needed resistance to add to the thrill. In any case, an obstacle in your way
gives you the opportunity to prove yourself, and the creativity you bring to
matters of love. In the eleventh-century Japanese novel The Tale of Genji, by
the court lady Murasaki Shikibu, the Rake Prince Niou is not disturbed by
the sudden disappearance of Ukifune, the woman he loves. She has fled be-
cause although she is interested in the prince, she is in love with another
man; but her absence allows the prince to go to extreme lengths to track
her down. His sudden appearance to whisk her away to a house deep in the
woods, and the gallantry he displays in doing so, overwhelm her. Remem-
ber: if no resistances or obstacles face you, you must create them. No se-
duction can proceed without them.26 • The Art of Seduction
The Rake is an extreme personality. Impudent, sarcastic, and bitingly
witty, he cares nothing for what anyone thinks. Paradoxically, this only
makes him more seductive. In the courtlike atmosphere of studio-era Holly-
wood, when most of the actors behaved like dutiful sheep, the great Rake
Errol Flynn stood out in his insolence. He defied the studio chiefs, engaged
in the most extreme pranks, reveled in his reputation as Hollywood's
supreme seducer—all of which enhanced his popularity. The Rake needs a
backdrop of convention—a stultified court, a humdrum marriage, a con-
servative culture—to shine, to be appreciated for the breath of fresh air he
provides. Never worry about going too far: the Rake's essence is that he
goes further than anyone else.
When the Earl of Rochester, seventeenth-century England's most no-
torious Rake and poet, abducted Elizabeth Malet, one of the most sought-
after young ladies of the court, he was duly punished. But lo and behold, a
few years later young Elizabeth, though wooed by the most eligible bache-
lors in the country, chose Rochester to be her husband. In demonstrating
his audacious desire, he made himself stand out from the crowd.
Related to the Rake's extremism is the sense of danger, taboo, perhaps
even the hint of cruelty about him. This was the appeal of another poet
Rake, one of the greatest in history: Lord Byron. Byron disliked any kind
of convention, and happily played this up. When he had an affair with his
half sister, who bore a child by him, he made sure that all of England knew
about it. He could be uncommonly cruel, as he was to his wife. But all of
this only made him that much more desirable. Danger and taboo appeal to
a repressed side in women, who are supposed to represent a civilizing, mor-
alizing force in culture. Just as a man may fall victim to the Siren through
his desire to be free of his sense of masculine responsibility, a woman may
succumb to the Rake through her yearning to be free of the constraints of
virtue and decency. Indeed it is often the most virtuous woman who falls
most deeply in love with the Rake.
Among the Rake's most seductive qualities is his ability to make women
want to reform him. How many thought they would be the one to tame
Lord Byron; how many of Picasso's women thought they would finally be
the one with whom he would spend the rest of his life. You must exploit
this tendency to the fullest. When caught red-handed in rakishness, fall
back on your weakness—your desire to change, and your inability to do so.
With so many women at your feet, what can you do? You are the one who
is the victim. You need help. Women will jump at this opportunity; they
are uncommonly indulgent of the Rake, for he is such a pleasant, dashing
figure. The desire to reform him disguises the true nature of their desire,
the secret thrill they get from him. When President Bill Clinton was clearly
caught out as a Rake, it was women who rushed to his defense, finding
every possible excuse for him. The fact that the Rake is so devoted to
women, in his own strange way, makes him lovable and seductive to them.
Finally, a Rake's greatest asset is his reputation. Never downplay your
bad name, or seem to apologize for it. Instead, embrace it, enhance it. It isThe Rake • 27
what draws women to you. There are several things you must be known
for: your irresistible attractiveness to women; your uncontrollable devotion
to pleasure (this will make you seem weak, but also exciting to be around);
your disdain for convention; a rebellious streak that makes you seem dan-
gerous. This last element can be slightly hidden; on the surface, be polite
and civil, while letting it be known that behind the scenes you are incorri-
gible. Duke de Richelieu made his conquests as public as possible, exciting
other women's competitive desire to join the club of the seduced. It was by
reputation that Lord Byron attracted his willing victims. A woman may feel
ambivalent about President Clinton's reputation, but beneath that ambiva-
lence is an underlying interest. Do not leave your reputation to chance or
gossip; it is your life's artwork, and you must craft it, hone it, and display it
with the care of an artist.
Symbol: Fire.
The Rake burns with a desire that
enflames the woman he is seducing. It is
extreme, uncontrollable, and dangerous. The Rake may
end in hell, but the flames surrounding him often make
him seem that much more desirable to women.28 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Like the Siren, the Rake faces the most danger from members of his
own sex, who are far less indulgent than women are of his constant
skirt chasing. In the old days, a Rake was often an aristocrat, and no matter
how many people he offended or even killed, in the end he would go un-
punished. Today, only stars and the very wealthy can play the Rake with
impunity; the rest of us need to be careful.
Elvis Presley had been a shy young man. Attaining early stardom, and
seeing the power it gave him over women, he went berserk, becoming a
Rake almost overnight. Like many Rakes, Elvis had a predilection for
women who were already taken. He found himself cornered by an angry
husband or boyfriend on numerous occasions, and came away with a few
cuts and bruises. This might seem to suggest that you should step lightly
around husbands and boyfriends, especially early on in your career. But the
charm of the Rake is that such dangers don't matter to them. You cannot
be a Rake by being fearful and prudent; the occasional pummeling is part
of the game. Later on, in any case, at the height of Elvis's fame, no husband
would dare touch him.
The greater danger for the Rake comes not from the violently offended
husband but from those insecure men who feel threatened by the Don Juan
figure. Although they will not admit it, they envy the Rake's life of plea-
sure, and like everyone envious, they will attack in hidden ways, often
masking their persecutions as morality. The Rake may find his career en-
dangered by such men (or by the occasional woman who is equally inse-
cure, and who feels hurt because the Rake does not want her). There is
little the Rake can do to avoid envy; if everyone was as successful in seduc-
tion, society would not function.
So accept envy as a badge of honor. Don't be naive, be aware. When
attacked by a moralist persecutor, do not be taken in by their crusade; it is
motivated by envy, pure and simple. You can blunt it by being less of a
Rake, asking forgiveness, claiming to have reformed, but this will damage
your reputation, making you seem less lovably rakish. In the end, it is better
to suffer attacks with dignity and keep on seducing. Seduction is the source
of your power; and you can always count on the infinite indulgence of
women.Most
people have dreams in their
youth that get shattered or worn
down with age. They find themselves dis-
appointed by people, events, reality, which can-
not match their youthful ideals. Ideal Lovers thrive
on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong
fantasies. You long for romance? Adventure? Lofty
spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your
fantasy. He or she is an artist in creating the illu-
sion you require, idealizing your portrait. In a
world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in
following the path of the
Ideal Lover.The Romantic Ideal
One evening around 1760, at the opera in the city of Cologne, a beau-
tiful young woman sat in her box, watching the audience. Beside her
was her husband, the town burgomaster—a middle-aged man and amiable
enough, but dull. Through her opera glasses the young woman noticed a
handsome man wearing a stunning outfit. Evidently her stare was noticed,
for after the opera the man introduced himself: his name was Giovanni Gi-
acomo Casanova.
The stranger kissed the woman's hand. She was going to a ball the fol-
lowing night, she told him; would he like to come? "If I might dare to
hope, Madame," he replied, "that you will dance only with me."
The next night, after the ball, the woman could think only of Casanova.
He had seemed to anticipate her thoughts—had been so pleasant, and yet
so bold. A few days later he dined at her house, and after her husband had
retired for the evening she showed him around. In her boudoir she pointed
out a wing of the house, a chapel, just outside her window. Sure enough, as
if he had read her mind, Casanova came to the chapel the next day to at-
tend Mass, and seeing her at the theater that evening he mentioned to her
that he had noticed a door there that must lead to her bedroom. She
laughed, and pretended to be surprised. In the most innocent of tones, he
said that he would find a way to hide in the chapel the next day—and al-
most without thinking, she whispered she would visit him there after every-
one had gone to bed.
So Casanova hid in the chapel's tiny confessional, waiting all day and
evening. There were rats, and he had nothing to lie upon; yet when the
burgomaster's wife finally came, late at night, he did not complain, but qui-
etly followed her to her room. They continued their trysts for several days.
By day she could hardly wait for night: finally something to live for, an ad-
venture. She left him food, books, and candles to ease his long and tedious
stays in the chapel—it seemed wrong to use a place of worship for such a
purpose, but that only made the affair more exciting. A few days later,
however, she had to take a journey with her husband. By the time she got
back, Casanova had disappeared, as quickly and gracefully as he had come.
Some years later, in London, a young woman named Miss Pauline no-
ticed an ad in a local newspaper. A gentleman was looking for a lady lodger
to rent a part of his house. Miss Pauline came from Portugal, and was of
the nobility; she had eloped to London with a lover, but he had beenIf at first sight a girl does
not make such a deep
impression on a person that
she awakens the ideal,
then ordinarily the
actuality is not especially
desirable; but if she does,
then no matter how
experienced a person is he
usually is rather
overwhelmed.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
A good lover will behave as
elegantly at dawn as at any
other time. He drags
himself out of bed with a
look of dismay on his face.
The lady urges him on:
"Come, my friend, it's
getting light. You don't
want anyone to find you
here." He gives a deep
sigh, as if to say that the
night has not been nearly
long enough and that it is
agony to leave. Once up,
he does not instantly pull
on his trousers. Instead he
comes close to the lady and
whispers whatever was left
unsaid during the night.
Even when he is dressed,
he still lingers, vaguely
pretending to be fastening
3132 • The Art of Seduction
forced to return home and she had had to stay on alone for some while be-
fore she could join him. Now she was lonely, and had little money, and was
depressed by her squalid circumstances—after all, she had been raised as a
lady. She answered the ad.
The gentleman turned out to be Casanova, and what a gentleman he
was. The room he offered was nice, and the rent was low; he asked only for
occasional companionship. Miss Pauline moved in. They played chess, went
riding, discussed literature. He was so well-bred, polite, and generous. A se-
rious and high-minded girl, she came to depend on their friendship; here
was a man she could talk to for hours. Then one day Casanova seemed
changed, upset, excited: he confessed that he was in love with her. She was
going back to Portugal soon, to rejoin her lover, and this was not what she
wanted to hear. She told him he should go riding to calm down.
Later that evening she received news: he had fallen from his horse. Feel-
ing responsible for his accident, she rushed to him, found him in bed, and
fell into his arms, unable to control herself. The two became lovers that
night, and remained so for the rest of Miss Pauline's stay in London. Yet
when it came time for her to leave for Portugal, he did not try to stop her;
instead, he comforted her, reasoning that each of them had offered the
other the perfect, temporary antidote to their loneliness, and that they
would be friends for life.
Some years later, in a small Spanish town, a young and beautiful girl
named Ignazia was leaving church after confession. She was approached by
Casanova. Walking her home, he explained that he had a passion for danc-
ing the fandango, and invited her to a ball the following evening. He was so
different from anyone in the town, which bored her so—she desperately
wanted to go. Her parents were against the arrangement, but she persuaded
her mother to act as a chaperone. After an unforgettable evening of danc-
ing (and he danced the fandango remarkably well for a foreigner), Casa-
nova confessed that he was madly in love with her. She replied (very sadly,
though) that she already had a fiancé. Casanova did not force the issue, but
over the next few days he took Ignazia to more dances and to the bullfights.
On one of these occasions he introduced her to a friend of his, a duchess,
who flirted with him brazenly; Ignazia was terribly jealous. By now she was
desperately in love with Casanova, but her sense of duty and religion for-
bade such thoughts.
Finally, after days of torment, Ignazia sought out Casanova and took his
hand: "My confessor tried to make me promise to never be alone with you
again," she said, "and as I could not, he refused to give me absolution. It is
the first time in my life such a thing has happened to me. I have put myself
in God's hands. I have made up my mind, so long as you are here, to do all
you wish. When to my sorrow you leave Spain, I shall find another confes-
sor. My fancy for you is, after all, only a passing madness."
Casanova was perhaps the most successful seducer in history; few women
could resist him. His method was simple: on meeting a woman, he wouldhis sash. • Presently he
raises the lattice, and the
two lovers stand together by
the side door while he tells
her how he dreads the
coining day, which will
keep them apart; then he
slips away. The lady
watches him go, and this
moment of parting will
remain among her most
charming memories. •
Indeed, one's attachment to
a man depends largely on
the elegance of his leave-
taking. When he jumps
out of bed, scurries about
the room, tightly fastens
his trouser sash, rolls up
the sleeves of his court
cloak, overrobe, or hunting
costume, stuffs his
belongings into the breast
of his robe and then briskly
secures the outer sash—one
really begins to hate him.
—THE PILLOW BOOK OF SEI
SHONAGON, TRANSLATED AND
EDITED BY IVAN MORRISThe Ideal Lover • 33
study her, go along with her moods, find out what was missing in her life,
and provide it. He made himself the Ideal Lover. The bored burgomaster's
wife needed adventure and romance; she wanted someone who would sac-
rifice time and comfort to have her. For Miss Pauline what was missing was
friendship, lofty ideals, serious conversation; she wanted a man of breeding
and generosity who would treat her like a lady. For Ignazia, what was miss-
ing was suffering and torment. Her life was too easy; to feel truly alive, and
to have something real to confess, she needed to sin. In each case Casanova
adapted himself to the woman's ideals, brought her fantasy to life. Once she
had fallen under his spell, a little ruse or calculation would seal the romance
(a day among rats, a contrived fall from a horse, an encounter with another
woman to make Ignazia jealous).
The Ideal Lover is rare in the modern world, for the role takes effort.
You will have to focus intensely on the other person, fathom what she is
missing, what he is disappointed by. People will often reveal this in subtle
ways: through gesture, tone of voice, a look in the eye. By seeming to be
what they lack, you will fit their ideal.
To create this effect requires patience and attention to detail. Most
people are so wrapped up in their own desires, so impatient, they are inca-
pable of the Ideal Lover role. Let that be a source of infinite opportunity.
Be an oasis in the desert of the self-absorbed; few can resist the temptation
of following a person who seems so attuned to their desires, to bringing to
life their fantasies. And as with Casanova, your reputation as one who
gives such pleasure will precede you and make your seductions that much
The cultivation of the pleasures of the senses was ever my
principal aim in life. Knowing that I was personally calcu-
lated to please the fair sex, I always strove to make myself
agreeable to it.
—CASANOVA
The Beauty Ideal
In 1730, when Jeanne Poisson was a mere nine years old, a fortune-teller
predicted that one day she would be the mistress of Louis XV. The pre-
diction was quite ridiculous, since Jeanne came from the middle class, and
it was a tradition stretching back for centuries that the king's mistress be
chosen from among the nobility. To make matters worse, Jeanne's father
was a notorious rake, and her mother had been a courtesan.
Fortunately for Jeanne, one of her mother's lovers was a man of great
wealth who took a liking to the pretty girl and paid for her education.
Jeanne learned to sing, to play the clavichord, to ride with uncommon skill,
to act and dance; she was schooled in literature and history as if she were a
boy. The playwright Crébillon instructed her in the art of conversation.During the early 1970s,
against a turbulent political
backdrop that included the
fiasco of American
involvement in the
Vietnam War and the
downfall of President
Richard Nixon's
presidency in the Watergate
scandal, a "me generation"
sprang to prominence—and
[Andy] Warhol was there
to hold up its mirror.
Unlike the radicalized
protesters of the 1960s
who wanted to change all
the ills of society, the self-
absorbed "me" people
sought to improve their
bodies and to "get in
touch" with their own
feelings. They cared
passionately about their
appearance, health, life-
style, and bank accounts.
Andy catered to their self-
centeredness and inflated
pride by offering his
services as a portraitist. By
the end of the decade, he
would be internationally
recognized as one of the
leading portraitists of his
era. . . . • Warhol offered
his clients an irresistible
product: a stylish and
flattering portrait by a
famous artist who was
himself a certified celebrity.
Conferring an alluring star
presence upon even the
most celebrated of faces, he
transformed his subjects
into glamorous apparitions,
presenting their faces as he
thought they wanted to be
seen and remembered. By
filtering his sitters' good
features through his
silkscreens and
exaggerating their vivacity,
he enabled them to gain
entree to a more mythic
and rarefied level of
existence. The possession
of great wealth and power
might do for everyday life,
but the commissioning of a
portrait by Warhol was a34 • The Art of Seduction
On top of it all, Jeanne was beautiful, and had a charm and grace that set
her apart early on. In 1741, she married a man of the lower nobility. Now
known as Madame d'Etioles, she could realize a great ambition: she opened
a literary salon. All of the great writers and philosophers of the time fre-
quented the salon, many because they were enamored of the hostess. One
of these was Voltaire, who became a lifelong friend.
Through all Jeanne's success, she never forgot the fortune-teller's pre-
diction, and still believed that she would one day conquer the king's heart.
It happened that one of her husband's country estates bordered on King
Louis's favorite hunting grounds. She would spy on him through the fence,
or find ways to cross his path, always while she happened to be wearing an
elegant, yet fetching outfit. Soon the king was sending her gifts of game.
When his official mistress died, in 1744, all of the court beauties vied to
take her place; but he began to spend more and more time with Madame
d'Etioles, dazzled by her beauty and charm. To the astonishment of the
court, that same year he made this middle-class woman his official mistress,
ennobling her with the title of the Marquise de Pompadour.
The king's need for novelty was notorious: a mistress would beguile
him with her looks, but he would soon grow bored with her and find
someone else. After the shock of his choice of Jeanne Poisson wore off, the
courtiers reassured themselves that it could not last—that he had only cho-
sen her for the novelty of having a middle-class mistress. Little did they
know that Jeanne s first seduction of the king was not the last seduction she
had in mind.
As time went by, the king found himself visiting his mistress more and
more often. As he ascended the hidden stair that led from his quarters to
hers in the palace of Versailles, anticipation of the delights that awaited him
at the top would begin to turn his head. First, the room was always warm,
and was filled with delightful scents. Then there were the visual delights:
Madame de Pompadour always wore a different costume, each one elegant
and surprising in its own way. She loved beautiful objects—fine porcelain,
Chinese fans, golden flowerpots—and every time he visited, there would
be something new and enchanting to see. Her manner was always light-
hearted; she was never defensive or resentful. Everything for pleasure. Then
there was their conversation: he had never been really able to talk with a
woman before, or to laugh, but the marquise could discourse skillfully on
any subject, and her voice was a pleasure to hear. And if the conversation
waned, she would move to the piano, play a tune, and sing wonderfully.
If ever the king seemed bored or sad, Madame de Pompadour would
propose some project—perhaps the building of a new country house. He
would have to advise in the design, the layout of the gardens, the decor.
Back at Versailles, Madame de Pompadour put hersell in charge of the
palace amusements, building a private theater for weekly performances un-
der her direction. Actors were chosen from among the courtiers, but the
female lead was always played by Madame de Pompadour, who was one of
the finest amateur actresses in France. The king became obsessed with thissure indication that the
sitter intended to secure a
posthumous fame as well.
Warhol's portraits were not
so much realistic documents
of contemporary faces as
they were designer icons
awaiting future devotions.
—DAVID BOURDON, WARHOL
Women have served all
these centuries as looking
glasses possessing the magic
and delicious power of
reflecting the figure of a
man at twice its natural
size.
—VIRGINIA WOOLF, A ROOM
OF ONE'S OWNThe Ideal Lover • 35
theater; he could barely wait for its performances. Along with this interest
came an increasing expenditure of money on the arts, and an involvement
in philosophy and literature. A man who had cared only for hunting and
gambling was spending less and less time with his male companions and be-
coming a great patron of the arts. Indeed he stamped a whole era with an
aesthetic style, which became known as "Louis Quinze," rivaling the style
associated with his illustrious predecessor, Louis XIV.
Lo and behold, year after year went by without Louis tiring of his mis-
tress. In fact he made her a duchess, and her power and influence extended
well beyond culture into politics. For twenty years, Madame de Pompadour
ruled both the court and the king's heart, until her untimely death, in
1764, at the age of forty-three.
Louis XV had a powerful inferiority complex. The successor to Louis XIV,
the most powerful king in French history, he had been educated and
trained for the throne—yet who could follow his predecessor's act? Eventu-
ally he gave up trying, devoting himself instead to physical pleasures, which
came to define how he was seen; the people around him knew they could
sway him by appealing to the basest parts of his character.
Madame de Pompadour, genius of seduction, understood that inside
Louis XV was a great man yearning to come out, and that his obsession
with pretty young women indicated a hunger for a more lasting kind of
beauty. Her first step was to cure his incessant bouts of boredom. It is easy
for kings to be bored—everything they want is given to them, and they sel-
dom learn to be satisfied with what they have. The Marquise de Pom-
padour dealt with this by bringing all sorts of fantasies to life, and creating
constant suspense. She had many skills and talents, and just as important,
she deployed them so artfully that he never discovered their limits. Once
she had accustomed him to more refined pleasures, she appealed to the
crushed ideals within him; in the mirror she held up to him, he saw his as-
piration to be great, a desire that, in France, inevitably included leadership
in culture. His previous series of mistresses had tickled only his sensual de-
sires. In Madame de Pompadour he found a woman who made him feel
greatness in himself. The other mistresses could easily be replaced, but he
could never find another Madame de Pompadour.
Most people believe themselves to be inwardly greater than they out-
wardly appear to the world. They are full of unrealized ideals: they could
be artists, thinkers, leaders, spiritual figures, but the world has crushed
them, denied them the chance to let their abilities flourish. This is the key
to their seduction—and to keeping them seduced over time. The Ideal
Lover knows how to conjure up this kind of magic. Appeal only to people's
physical side, as many amateur seducers do, and they will resent you for
playing upon their basest instincts. But appeal to their better selves, to a
higher standard of beauty, and they will hardly notice that they have been
seduced. Make them feel elevated, lofty, spiritual, and your power over
them will be limitless.36 • The Art of Seduction
Love brings to light a lover's noble and hidden qualities—
his rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be decep-
tive as to his normal character.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Keys to the Character
Each of us carries inside us an ideal, either of what we would like to be-
come, or of what we want another person to be for us. This ideal goes
back to our earliest years—to what we once felt was missing in our lives,
what others did not give to us, what we could not give to ourselves. Maybe
we were smothered in comfort, and we long for danger and rebellion. If we
want danger but it frightens us, perhaps we look for someone who seems at
home with it. Or perhaps our ideal is more elevated—we want to be more
creative, nobler, and kinder than we ever manage to be. Our ideal is some-
thing we feel is missing inside us.
Our ideal may be buried in disappointment, but it lurks underneath,
waiting to be sparked. If another person seems to have that ideal quality, or
to have the ability to bring it out in us, we fall in love. That is the response
to Ideal Lovers. Attuned to what is missing inside you, to the fantasy that
will stir you, they reflect your ideal—and you do the rest, projecting on to
them your deepest desires and yearnings. Casanova and Madame de Pom-
padour did not merely seduce their targets into a sexual affair, they made
them fall in love.
The key to following the path of the Ideal Lover is the ability to ob-
serve. Ignore your targets' words and conscious behavior; focus on the tone
of their voice, a blush here, a look there—those signs that betray what
their words won't say. Often the ideal is expressed in contradiction. King
Louis XV seemed to care only about chasing deer and young girls, but that
in fact covered up his disappointment in himself; he yearned to have his no-
bler qualities flattered.
Never has there been a better moment than now to play the Ideal
Lover. That is because we live in a world in which everything must seem
elevated and well-intentioned. Power is the most taboo topic of all: al-
though it is the reality we deal with every day in our struggles with people,
there is nothing noble, self-sacrificing, or spiritual about it. Ideal Lovers
make you feel nobler, make the sensual and sexual seem spiritual and aes-
thetic. Like all seducers, they play with power, but they disguise their ma-
nipulations behind the facade of an ideal. Few people see through them
and their seductions last longer.
Some ideals resemble Jungian archetypes—they go back a long way
in our culture, and their hold is almost unconscious. One such dream is
that of the chivalrous knight. In the courtly love tradition of the Middle
Ages, a troubadour/knight would find a lady, almost always a married one,The Ideal Lover • 37
and would serve as her vassal. He would go through terrible trials on her
behalf, undertake dangerous pilgrimages in her name, suffer awful tortures
to prove his love. (This could include bodily mutilation, such as tearing off
of fingernails, the cutting of an ear, etc.) He would also write poems and
sing beautiful songs to her, for no troubadour could succeed without some
kind of aesthetic or spiritual quality to impress his lady. The key to the ar-
chetype is a sense of absolute devotion. A man who will not let matters of
warfare, glory, or money intrude into the fantasy of courtship has limitless
power. The troubadour role is an ideal because people who do not put
themselves and their own interests first are truly rare. For a woman to at-
tract the intense attention of such a man is immensely appealing to her
vanity.
In eighteenth-century Osaka, a man named Nisan took the courtesan
Dewa out walking, first taking care to sprinkle the clover bushes along the
path with water, which looked like morning dew. Dewa was greatly moved
by this beautiful sight. "I have heard," she said, "that loving couples of deer
are wont to lie behind clover bushes. How I should like to see this in real
life!" Nisan had heard enough. That very day he had a section of her house
torn down and ordered the planting of dozens of clover bushes in what had
once been a part of her bedroom. That night, he arranged for peasants to
round up wild deer from the mountains and bring them to the house. The
next day Dewa awoke to precisely the scene she had described. Once she
appeared overwhelmed and moved, he had the clover and deer taken away
and the house rebuilt.
One of history's most gallant lovers, Sergei Saltykov, had the misfortune
to fall in love with one of history's least available women: the Grand Duchess
Catherine, future empress of Russia. Catherine's every move was watched
over by her husband, Peter, who suspected her of trying to cheat on him
and appointed servants to keep an eye on her. She was isolated, unloved,
and unable to do anything about it. Saltykov, a handsome young army offi-
cer, was determined to be her rescuer. In 1752 he befriended Peter, and
also the couple in charge of watching over Catherine. In this way he was
able to see her and occasionally exchange a word or two with her that re-
vealed his intentions. He performed the most foolhardy and dangerous ma-
neuvers to be able to see her alone, including diverting her horse during a
royal hunt and riding off into the forest with her. He told her how much
he sympathized with her plight, and that he would do anything to help her.
To be caught courting Catherine would have meant death, and eventu-
ally Peter came to suspect that something was up between his wife and
Saltykov, though he was never sure. His enmity did not discourage the
dashing officer, who just put still more energy and ingenuity into finding
ways to arrange secret trysts. The couple were lovers for two years, and
Saltykov was undoubtedly the father of Catherine's son Paul, later the em-
peror of Russia. When Peter finally got rid of him by sending him off to
Sweden, news of his gallantry traveled ahead of him, and women swooned38 • The Art of Seduction
to be his next conquest. You may not have to go to as much trouble or risk,
but you will always be rewarded for actions that reveal a sense of self-
sacrifice or devotion.
The embodiment of the Ideal Lover for the 1920s was Rudolph Valen-
tino, or at least the image created of him in film. Everything he did—the
gifts, the flowers, the dancing, the way he took a woman's hand—showed a
scrupulous attention to the details that would signify how much he was
thinking of her. The image was of a man who made courtship take time,
transforming it into an aesthetic experience. Men hated Valentino, because
women now expected them to match the ideal of patience and attentive-
ness that he represented. Yet nothing is more seductive than patient atten-
tiveness. It makes the affair seem lofty, aesthetic, not really about sex. The
power of a Valentino, particularly nowadays, is that people like this are so
rare. The art of playing to a woman's ideal has almost disappeared—which
only makes it that much more alluring.
If the chivalrous lover remains the ideal for women, men often idealize
the Madonna/whore, a woman who combines sensuality with an air of
spirituality or innocence. Think of the great courtesans of the Italian Re-
naissance, such as Tullia d'Aragona—essentially a prostitute, like all courte-
sans, but able to disguise her social role by establishing a reputation as a poet
and philosopher. Tullia was what was then known as an "honest courtesan."
Honest courtesans would go to church, but they had an ulterior motive: for
men, their presence at Mass was exciting. Their houses were pleasure
palaces, but what made these homes so visually delightful was their art-
works and shelves full of books, volumes of Petrarch and Dante. For the
man, the thrill, the fantasy, was to sleep with a woman who was sexual yet
had the ideal qualities of a mother and the spirit and intellect of an artist.
Where the pure prostitute excited desire but also disgust, the honest cour-
tesan made sex seem elevated and innocent, as if it were happening in the
Garden of Eden. Such women held immense power over men. To this day
they remain an ideal, if for no other reason than that they offer such a range
of pleasures. The key is ambiguity—to combine the appearance of sensi-
tivity to the pleasures of the flesh with an air of innocence, spirituality, a
poetic sensibility. This mix of the high and the low is immensely seductive.
The dynamics of the Ideal Lover have limitless possibilities, not all of
them erotic. In politics, Talleyrand essentially played the role of the Ideal
Lover with Napoleon, whose ideal in both a cabinet minister and a friend
was a man who was aristocratic, smooth with the ladies—all the things that
Napoleon himself was not. In 1798, when Talleyrand was the French for-
eign minister, he hosted a party in Napoleon's honor after the great gen-
eral's dazzling military victories in Italy. To the day Napoleon died, he
remembered this party as the best he had ever attended. It was a lavish af-
fair, and Talleyrand wove a subtle message into it by placing Roman busts
around the house, and by talking to Napoleon of reviving the imperial glo-
ries of ancient Rome. This sparked a glint in the leader's eye, and indeed, a
few years later, Napoleon gave himself the title of emperor—a move thatThe Ideal Lover • 39
only made Talleyrand more powerful. The key to Talleyrand's power was
his ability to fathom Napoleon's secret ideal: his desire to be an emperor, a
dictator. Talleyrand simply held up a mirror to Napoleon and let him
glimpse that possibility. People are always vulnerable to insinuations like
this, which stroke their vanity, almost everyone's weak spot. Hint at some-
thing for them to aspire to, reveal your faith in some untapped potential
you see in them, and you will soon have them eating out of your hand.
If Ideal Lovers are masters at seducing people by appealing to their
higher selves, to something lost from their childhood, politicians can bene-
fit by applying this skill on a mass scale, to an entire electorate. This was
what John F. Kennedy quite deliberately did with the American public,
most obviously in creating the "Camelot" aura around himself. The word
"Camelot" was applied to his presidency only after his death, but the ro-
mance he consciously projected through his youth and good looks was fully
functioning during his lifetime. More subtly, he also played with America's
images of its own greatness and lost ideals. Many Americans felt that with
the wealth and comfort of the late 1950s had come great losses; ease and
conformity had buried the country's pioneer spirit. Kennedy appealed to
those lost ideals through the imagery of the New Frontier, which was ex-
emplified by the space race. The American instinct for adventure could
find outlets here, even if most of them were symbolic. And there were
other calls for public service, such as the creation of the Peace Corps.
Through appeals like these, Kennedy resparked the uniting sense of mission
that had gone missing in America during the years since World War II. He
also attracted to himself a more emotional response than presidents com-
monly got. People literally fell in love with him and the image.
Politicians can gain seductive power by digging into a country's past,
bringing images and ideals that have been abandoned or repressed back to
the surface. They only need the symbol; they do not really have to worry
about re-creating the reality behind it. The good feelings they stir up are
enough to ensure a positive response.
Symbol: The
Portrait Painter. Under his eye, all of
your physical imperfections disappear. He brings
out noble qualities in you, frames you in a myth, makes
you godlike, immortalizes you. For his ability to create
such fantasies, he is rewarded with great power.40 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The main dangers in the role of the Ideal Lover are the consequences
that arise if you let reality creep in. You are creating a fantasy that in-
volves an idealization of your own character. And this is a precarious task,
for you are human, and imperfect. If your faults are ugly enough, or intru-
sive enough, they will burst the bubble you have blown, and your target
will revile you. Whenever Tullia d'Aragona was caught acting like a com-
mon prostitute (when, for instance, she was caught having an affair just for
money), she would have to leave town and establish herself elsewhere. The
fantasy of her as a spiritual figure was broken. Casanova too faced this dan-
ger, but was usually able to surmount it by finding a clever way to break off
the relationship before the woman realized that he was not what she had
imagined: he would find some excuse to leave town, or, better still, he
would choose a victim who was herself leaving town soon, and whose
awareness that the affair would be short-lived would make her idealizing of
him all the more intense. Reality and long intimate exposure have a way of
dulling a person's perfection. The nineteenth-century poet Alfred de Mus-
set was seduced by the writer George Sand, whose larger-than-life charac-
ter appealed to his romantic nature. But when the couple visited Venice
together, and Sand came down with dysentery, she was suddenly no longer
an idealized figure but a woman with an unappealing physical problem. De
Musset himself showed a whiny, babyish side on this trip, and the lovers
separated. Once apart, however, they were able to idealize each other again,
and reunited a few months later. When reality intrudes, distance is often a
solution.
In politics the dangers are similar. Years after Kennedy's death, a string
of revelations (his incessant sexual affairs, his excessively dangerous
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, etc.) belied the myth he had created. His
image has survived this tarnishing; poll after poll shows that he is still
revered. Kennedy is a special case, perhaps, in that his assassination made
him a martyr, reinforcing the process of idealization that he had already set
in motion. But he is not the only example of an Ideal Lover whose attrac-
tion survives unpleasant revelations; these figures unleash such powerful
fantasies, and there is such a hunger for the myths and ideals they have to
sell, that they are often quickly forgiven. Still, it is always wise to be pru-
dent, and to keep people from glimpsing the less-than-ideal side of your
character.Most
of us feel trapped within the
limited roles that the world expects us to
play. We are instantly attracted to those who are
more fluid, more ambiguous, than we are—those who
create their own persona. Dandies excite us because they can-
not be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for ourselves.
They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their
own physical image, which is always startling; they are mysteri-
ous and elusive. They also appeal to the narcissism of each
sex: to a woman they are psychologically female, to a man
they are male. Dandies fascinate and seduce in large
numbers. Use the power of the Dandy to create
an ambiguous, alluring presence that
stirs repressed desires.The Feminine Dandy
When the eighteen-year-old Rodolpho Guglielmi emigrated from
Italy to the United States in 1913, he came with no particular skills
apart from his good looks and his dancing prowess. To put these qualities to
advantage, he found work in the thes dansants, the Manhattan dance halls
where young girls would go alone or with friends and hire a taxi dancer for
a brief thrill. The taxi dancer would expertly twirl them around the dance
floor, flirting and chatting, all for a small fee. Guglielmi soon made a name
as one of the best—so graceful, poised, and pretty.
In working as a taxi dancer, Guglielmi spent a great deal of time around
women. He quickly learned what pleased them—how to mirror them in
subtle ways, how to put them at ease (but not too much). He began to pay
attention to his clothes, creating his own dapper look: he danced with a
corset under his shirt to give himself a trim figure, sported a wristwatch
(considered effeminate in those days), and claimed to be a marquis. In 1915,
he landed a job demonstrating the tango in fancy restaurants, and changed
his name to the more evocative Rodolpho di Valentina. A year later he
moved to Los Angeles: he wanted to try to make it in Hollywood.
Now known as Rudolph Valentino, Guglielmi appeared as an extra in
several low-budget pictures. He eventually landed a somewhat larger role in
the 1919 film Eyes of Youth, in which he played a seducer, and caught
women's attention by how different a seducer he was: his movements were
graceful and delicate, his skin so smooth and his face so pretty that when
he swooped down on his victim and drowned her protests with a kiss, he
seemed more thrilling than sinister. Next came The Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse, in which Valentino played the male lead, Julio the playboy, and
became an overnight sex symbol through a tango sequence in which he se-
duced a young woman by leading her through the dance. The scene encap-
sulated the essence of his appeal: his feet smooth and fluid, his poise almost
feminine, combined with an air of control. Female members of the audi-
ence literally swooned as he raised a married woman's hands to his lips, or
shared the fragrance of a rose with his lover. He seemed so much more at-
tentive to women than other men did; but mixed in with this delicacy was
a hint of cruelty and menace that drove women wild.
In his most famous film, The Sheik, Valentino played an Arab prince
(later revealed to be a Scottish lord abandoned in the Sahara as a baby) who
rescues a proud English lady in the desert, then conquers her in a mannerOnce a son was born to
Mercury and the goddess
Venus, and he was brought
up by the naiads in Ida's
caves. In his features, it
was easy to trace
resemblance to his father
and to his mother. He was
called after them, too, for
his name was
Hermaphroditus. As soon
as he was fifteen, he left
his native hills, and Ida
where he had been brought
up, and for the sheer joy of
travelling visited remote
places. . . .He went as far
as the cities of Lycia, and
on to the Carians, who
dwell nearby. In this region
he spied a pool of water, so
clear that he could see right
to the bottom. . . . The
water was like crystal, and
the edges of the pool were
ringed with fresh turf and
grass that was always
green. A nymph
[Salmacis] dwelt
there. . . . Often she would
gather flowers, and it so
happened that she was
engaged in this pastime
when she caught sight of
the boy, Hermaphroditus.
As soon as she had seen
him, she longed to possess
him. . . .She addressed
him: "Fair boy, you surely
deserve to be thought a
4344 • The Art of Seduction
that borders on rape. When she asks, "Why have you brought me here?,"
he replies, "Are you not woman enough to know?" Yet she ends up falling
in love with him, as indeed women did in movie audiences all over the
world, thrilling at his strange blend of the feminine and the masculine. In
one scene in The Sheik, the English lady points a gun at Valentino; his re-
sponse is to point a delicate cigarette holder back at her. She wears pants;
he wears long flowing robes and abundant eye makeup. Later films would
include scenes of Valentino dressing and undressing, a kind of striptease
showing glimpses of his trim body. In almost all of his films he played some
exotic period character—a Spanish bullfighter, an Indian rajah, an Arab
sheik, a French nobleman—and he seemed to delight in dressing up in jew-
els and tight uniforms.
In the 1920s, women were beginning to play with a new sexual free-
dom. Instead of waiting for a man to be interested in them, they wanted to
be able to initiate the affair, but they still wanted the man to end up sweep-
ing them off their feet. Valentino understood this perfectly. His off-screen
life corresponded to his movie image: he wore bracelets on his arm, dressed
impeccably, and reportedly was cruel to his wife, and hit her. (His adoring
public carefully ignored his two failed marriages and his apparently nonex-
istent sex life.) When he suddenly died—in New York in August 1926, at
the age of thirty-one, from complications after surgery for an ulcer—the
response was unprecedented: more than 100,000 people filed by his coffin,
many female mourners became hysterical, and the whole nation was spell-
bound. Nothing like this had happened before for a mere actor.
There is a film of Valentino's, Monsieur Beaucaire, in which he plays a total
fop, a much more effeminate role than he normally played, and without his
usual hint of dangerousness. The film was a flop. Women did not respond
to Valentino as a swish. They were thrilled by the ambiguity of a man who
shared many of their own feminine traits, yet remained a man. Valentino
dressed and played with his physicality like a woman, but his image was
masculine. He wooed as a woman would woo if she were a man—slowly,
attentively, paying attention to details, setting a rhythm instead of hurrying
to a conclusion. Yet when the time came for boldness and conquest, his
timing was impeccable, overwhelming his victim and giving her no chance
to protest. In his movies, Valentino practiced the same gigolo's art of leading
a woman on that he had mastered as a teenager on the dance floor—
chatting, flirting, pleasing, but always in control.
Valentino remains an enigma to this day. His private life and his charac-
ter are wrapped in mystery; his image continues to seduce as it did during
his lifetime. He served as the model for Elvis Presley, who was obsessed
with this star of the silents, and also for the modern male dandy who plays
with gender but retains an edge of danger and cruelty.
Seduction was and will always remain the female form of power and
warfare. It was originally the antidote to rape and violence. The man who
uses this form of power on a woman is in essence turning the game around,god. If you are, perhaps
you may be Cupid? . . . If
there is such a girl [engaged
to you], let me enjoy your
love in secret: but if there is
not, then I pray that I may
be your bride, and that we
may enter upon marriage
together." The naiad said
no more; but a blush
stained the boy's cheeks, for
he did not know what love
was. Even blushing became
him: his cheeks were the
colour of ripe apples,
hanging in a sunny orchard,
like painted ivory or like
the moon when, in eclipse,
she shows a reddish hue
beneath her brightness. . . .
Incessantly the nymph
demanded at least sisterly
kisses, and tried to put her
arms round his ivory neck.
"Will you stop!" he cried,
"or I shall run away and
leave this place and you!"
Salmacis was afraid: "1
yield the spot to you,
stranger, I shall not
intrude," she said; and,
turning from him, pretended
to go away. . . . The boy,
meanwhile, thinking
himself unobserved and
alone, strolled this way and
that on the grassy sward,
and dipped his toes in the
lapping water—then his
feet, up to the ankles.
Then, tempted by the
enticing coolness of the
waters, he quickly stripped
his young body of its soft
garments. At the sight,
Salmacis was spell-bound.
She was on fire with
passion to possess his
naked beauty, and her very
eyes flamed with a
brilliance like that of the
dazzling sun, when his
bright disc is reflected in a
mirror. . . . She longed to
embrace him then, and
with difficulty restrained
her frenzy.
Hermaphroditus, clapping
his hollow palms againstThe Dandy • 45
employing feminine weapons against her; without losing his masculine
identity, the more subtly feminine he becomes the more effective the se-
duction. Do not be one of those who believe that what is most seductive is
being devastatingly masculine. The Feminine Dandy has a much more sin-
ister effect. He lures the woman in with exactly what she wants—a familiar,
pleasing, graceful presence. Mirroring feminine psychology, he displays at-
tention to his appearance, sensitivity to detail, a slight coquettishness—but
also a hint of male cruelty. Women are narcissists, in love with the charms
of their own sex. By showing them feminine charm, a man can mesmerize
and disarm them, leaving them vulnerable to a bold, masculine move.
The Feminine Dandy can seduce on a mass scale. No single woman
really possesses him—he is too elusive—but all can fantasize about doing so.
The key is ambiguity: your sexuality is decidedly heterosexual, but your
body and psychology float delightfully back and forth between the two
poles.
I am a woman. Every artist is a woman and should have a
taste for other women. Artists who are homosexual cannot
be true artists because they like men, and since they them-
selves are women they are reverting to normality.
—PABLO PICASSO
The Masculine Dandy
In the 1870s, Pastor Henrik Gillot was the darling of the St. Petersburg
intelligentsia. He was young, handsome, well-read in philosophy and lit-
erature, and he preached a kind of enlightened Christianity. Dozens of
young girls had crushes on him and would flock to his sermons just to look
at him. In 1878, however, he met a girl who changed his life. Her name
was Lou von Salomé (later known as Lou Andreas-Salomé), and she was
seventeen; he was forty-two.
Salomé was pretty, with radiant blue eyes. She had read a lot, particu-
larly for a girl her age, and was interested in the gravest philosophical and
religious issues. Her intensity, her intelligence, her responsiveness to ideas
cast a spell over Gillot. When she entered his office for her increasingly fre-
quent discussions with him, the place seemed brighter and more alive. Per-
haps she was flirting with him, in the unconscious manner of a young
girl—yet when Gillot admitted to himself that he was in love with her, and
proposed marriage, Salomé was horrified. The confused pastor never quite
got over Lou von Salomé, becoming the first of a long string of famous
men to be the victim of a lifelong unfulfilled infatuation with her.
In 1882, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was wandering
around Italy alone. In Genoa he received a letter from his friend Paul Rée,
a Prussian philosopher whom he admired, recounting his discussions with a
remarkable young Russian woman, Lou von Salomé, in Rome. Salomé washis body, dived quickly into
the stream. As he raised
first one arm and then the
other, his body gleamed in
the clear water, as if
someone had encased
anivory statue or white
lilies in transparent glass.
"I have won! He is
mine!" cried the nymph,
and flinging aside her
garments, plunged into the
heart of the pool. The boy
fought against her, but she
held him, and snatched
kisses as he struggled,
placing her hands beneath
him, stroking
his unwilling breast, and
clinging to him, now on
this side, and now on that.
• Finally, in spite of ail his
efforts to slip from her
grasp, she twined around
him, like a serpent when it
is being carried off into the
air by the king of birds: for,
as it hangs from the eagle's
beak, the snake coils round
his head and talons and
with its tail hampers his
beating wings. . . ."You
may fight, you rogue, but
you will not escape. May
the gods grant me this, may
no time to come ever
separate him from me, or
me from him!" Her prayers
found favour with the gods:
for, as they lay together,
their bodies were united
and from being two persons
they became one. As when
a gardener grafts a branch
on to a tree, and sees the
two unite as they grow,
and come to maturity
together, so when their
limbs met in that clinging
embrace the nymph and the
boy were no longer two, but
a single form, possessed of
a dual nature, which could
not be called male or
female, but seemed to be at
once both and neither.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES46 • The Art of Seduction
there on holiday with her mother; Rée had managed to accompany her on
long walks through the city, unchaperoned, and they had had many conver-
sations. Her ideas on God and Christianity were quite similar to Nietz-
sche's, and when Rée had told her that the famous philosopher was a friend
of his, she had insisted that he invite Nietzsche to join them. In subsequent
letters Ree described how mysteriously captivating Salomé was, and how
anxious she was to meet Nietzsche. The philosopher soon went to Rome.
When Nietzsche finally met Salomé, he was overwhelmed. She had the
most beautiful eyes he had ever seen, and during their first long talk those
eyes lit up so intensely that he could not help feeling there was something
erotic about her excitement. Yet he was also confused: Salomé kept her dis-
tance, and did not respond to his compliments. What a devilish young
woman. A few days later she read him a poem of hers, and he cried; her
ideas about life were so like his own. Deciding to seize the moment, Nietz-
sche proposed marriage. (He did not know that Ree had done so as well.)
Salomé declined. She was interested in philosophy, life, adventure, not mar-
riage. Undaunted, Nietzsche continued to court her. On an excursion to
Lake Orta with Rée, Salomé, and her mother, he managed to get the girl
alone, accompanying her on a walk up Monte Sacro while the others stayed
behind. Apparently the views and Nietzsche's words had the proper pas-
sionate effect; in a later letter to her, he described this walk as "the most
beautiful dream of my life." Now he was a man possessed: all he could
think about was marrying Salomé and having her all to himself.
A few months later Salomé visited Nietzsche in Germany. They took
long walks together, and stayed up all night discussing philosophy. She mir-
rored his deepest thoughts, anticipated his ideas about religion. Yet when
he again proposed marriage, she scolded him as conventional: it was Nietz-
sche, after all, who had developed a philosophical defense of the superman,
the man above everyday morality, yet Salomé was by nature far less conven-
tional than he was. Her firm, uncompromising manner only deepened the
spell she cast over him, as did her hint of cruelty When she finally left him,
making it clear that she had no intention of marrying him, Nietzsche was
devastated. As an antidote to his pain, he wrote Thus Spake Zarathustra, a
book full of sublimated eroticism and deeply inspired by his talks with her.
From then on Salomé was known throughout Europe as the woman who
had broken Nietzsche's heart.
Salomé moved to Berlin. Soon the city's greatest intellectuals were
falling under the spell of her independence and free spirit. The playwrights
Gerhart Hauptmann and Franz Wedekind became infatuated with her; in
1897, the great Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke fell in love with her. By
that time her reputation was widely known, and she was a published novel-
ist. This certainly played a part in seducing Rilke, but he was also attracted
by a kind of masculine energy he found in her that he had never seen in a
woman. Rilke was then twenty-two, Salomé thirty-six. He wrote her love
letters and poems, followed her everywhere, and began an affair with her
that was to last several years. She corrected his poetry, imposed disciplineDandyism is not even, as
many unthinking people
seem to suppose, an
immoderate interest in
personal appearance and
material elegance. For the
true dandy these things are
only a symbol oj the
aristocratic superiority of his
personality. . . . • What,
then, is this ruling passion
that has turned into a creed
and created its own skilled
tyrants? What is this
unwritten constitution that
has created so haughty a
caste? It is, above all, a
burning need to acquire
originality, within the
apparent bounds of
convention. It is a sort of
cult of oneself, which can
dispense even with what are
commonly called illusions. It
is the delight in causing
astonishment, and the
proud satisfaction of
never oneself being
astonished. . . .
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
DANDY, QUOTED IN VICE: AN
ANTHOLOGY, EDITED BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
In the midst of this display
of statesmanship,
eloquence, cleverness, and
exalted ambition,
Alcibiades lived a life of
prodigious luxury,
drunkenness, debauchery,
and insolence. He was
effeminate in his dress and
would walk through the
market-place trailing his
long purple robes, and he
spent extravagantly. He
had the decks of his
triremes cut away to allow
him to sleep more
comfortably, and his
bedding was slung on cords,
rather than spread on the
hard planks. He had a
golden shield made for
him, which was
emblazoned not with anyThe Dandy • 41
on his overly romantic verse, inspired ideas for new poems. But she was put
off by his childish dependence on her, his weakness. Unable to stand weak-
ness of any kind, she eventually left him. Consumed by her memory, Rilke
long continued to pursue her. In 1926, lying on his deathbed, he begged
his doctors, "Ask Lou what is wrong with me. She is the only one who
knows."
One man wrote of Salomé, "There was something terrifying about her
embrace. Looking at you with her radiant blue eyes, she would say, 'The
reception of the semen is for me the height of ecstasy.' And she had an in-
satiable appetite for it. She was completely amoral ... a vampire." The
Swedish psychotherapist Poul Bjerre, one of her later conquests, wrote, "I
think Nietzsche was right when he said that Lou was a thoroughly evil
woman. Evil however in the Goethean sense: evil that produces good. . . .
She may have destroyed lives and marriages but her presence was exciting."
The two emotions that almost every male felt in the presence of Lou
Andreas-Salomé were confusion and excitement—the two prerequisite
feelings for any successful seduction. People were intoxicated by her strange
mix of the masculine and the feminine; she was beautiful, with a radiant
smile and a graceful, flirtatious manner, but her independence and her in-
tensely analytical nature made her seem oddly male. This ambiguity was
expressed in her eyes, which were both coquettish and probing. It was con-
fusion that kept men interested and curious: no other woman was like this.
They wanted to know more. The excitement stemmed from her ability to
stir up repressed desires. She was a complete nonconformist, and to be in-
volved with her was to break all kinds of taboos. Her masculinity made the
relationship seem vaguely homosexual; her slightly cruel, slightly domi-
neering streak could stir up masochistic yearnings, as it did in Nietzsche.
Salomé radiated a forbidden sexuality. Her powerful effect on men—the
lifelong infatuations, the suicides (there were several), the periods of intense
creativity, the descriptions of her as a vampire or a devil—attest to the ob-
scure depths of the psyche that she was able to reach and disturb.
The Masculine Dandy succeeds by reversing the normal pattern of
male superiority in matters of love and seduction. A man's apparent inde-
pendence, his capacity for detachment, often seems to give him the upper
hand in the dynamic between men and women. A purely feminine woman
will arouse desire, but is always vulnerable to the man's capricious loss of
interest; a purely masculine woman, on the other hand, will not arouse that
interest at all. Follow the path of the Masculine Dandy, however, and you
neutralize all a man's powers. Never give completely of yourself; while you
are passionate and sexual, always retain an air of independence and self-
possession. You might move on to the next man, or so he will think. You
have other, more important matters to concern yourself with, such as your
work. Men do not know how to fight women who use their own weapons
against them; they are intrigued, aroused, and disarmed. Few men can resist
the taboo pleasures offered up to them by the Masculine Dandy.ancestral device, but with
the figure of Eros armed
with a thunderbolt. The
leading men of Athens
watched all this with
disgust and indignation
and they were deeply
disturbed by his
contemptuous and lawless
behaviour, which seemed to
them monstrous and
suggested the habits of a
tyrant. The people's feelings
towards him have been very
aptly expressed by
Aristophanes in the line:
"They long for him, they
hate him, they cannot do
without him. . . ." • The
fact was that his voluntary
donations, the public shows
he supported, his unrivalled
munificence to the state, the
fame of his ancestry, the
power of his oratory and
his physical strength and
beauty . . . all combined to
make the Athenians forgive
him everything else, and
they were constantly finding
euphemisms for his lapses
and putting them down to
youthful high spirits
and honourable ambition.
—PLUTARCH,"THE LIFE OF
ALCIBIADES," THE RISE AND
FALL OF ATHENS: NINE GREEK
LIVES, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
Further light—a whole
flood of it—is thrown
upon this attraction of
the male in petticoats for
the female, in the diary
of the Abbé de Choisy, one
of the most brilliant men-
women of history, of whom
we shall hear a great deal
more later. The abbé, a
churchman of Paris, was a
constant masquerader in
female attire. He lived in
the days of Louis XIV, and
was a great friend of Louis'
brother, also addicted to
women's clothes. A young48 • The Art of Seduction
The seduction emanating from a person of uncertain or dis-
simulated sex is powerful.
—COLETTE
Keys to the Character
Many of us today imagine that sexual freedom has progressed in recent
years—that everything has changed, for better or worse. This is
mostly an illusion; a reading of history reveals periods of licentiousness
(imperial Rome, late-seventeenth-century England, the "floating world" of
eighteenth-century Japan) far in excess of what we are currently experi-
encing. Gender roles are certainly changing, but they have changed before.
Society is in a state of constant flux, but there is something that does not
change: the vast majority of people conform to whatever is normal for the
time. They play the role allotted to them. Conformity is a constant because
humans are social creatures who are always imitating one another. At cer-
tain points in history it may be fashionable to be different and rebellious,
but if a lot of people are playing that role, there is nothing different or re-
bellious about it.
We should never complain about most people's slavish conformity,
however, for it offers untold possibilities of power and seduction to those
who are up for a few risks. Dandies have existed in all ages and cultures (Al-
cibiades in ancient Greece, Korechika in late-tenth-century Japan), and
wherever they have gone they have thrived on the conformist role playing
of others. The Dandy displays a true and radical difference from other peo-
ple, a difference of appearance and manner. Since most of us are secretly
oppressed by our lack of freedom, we are drawn to those who are more
fluid and flaunt their difference.
Dandies seduce socially as well as sexually; groups form around them,
their style is wildly imitated, an entire court or crowd will fall in love
with them. In adapting the Dandy character for your own purposes, re-
member that the Dandy is by nature a rare and beautiful flower. Be differ-
ent in ways that are both striking and aesthetic, never vulgar; poke fun at
current trends and styles, go in a novel direction, and be supremely uninter-
ested in what anyone else is doing. Most people are insecure; they will
wonder what you are up to, and slowly they will come to admire and imi-
tate you, because you express yourself with total confidence.
The Dandy has traditionally been defined by clothing, and certainly
most Dandies create a unique visual style. Beau Brummel, the most famous
Dandy of all, would spend hours on his toilette, particularly the inimitably
styled knot in his necktie, for which he was famous throughout early-
nineteenth-century England. But a Dandy's style cannot be obvious, for
Dandies are subtle, and never try hard for attention—attention comes to
them. The person whose clothes are flagrantly different has little imagina-
tion or taste. Dandies show their difference in the little touches that markgirl, Mademoiselle
Charlotte, thrown much
into his company, fell
desperately in love with the
abbé, and when the affair
had progressed to a
liaison, the abbé asked her
how she came to be won . . .
• "I stood in no need of
caution as I should have
with a man. I saw nothing
but a beautiful woman,
and why should I be
forbidden to love you?
What advantages a
woman's dress gives you!
The heart of a man is
there, and that makes a
great impression upon us,
and on the other hand, all
the charms of the fair sex
fascinate us, and prevent us
from taking precautions. "
—C.J. BULLIET,
VENUS CASTINA
Beau Brummell was
regarded as unbalanced in
his passion for daily
ablutions. His ritualistic
morning toilet took upward
of five hours, one hour
spent inching himself into
his skin-tight buckskin
breeches, an hour with the
hairdresser and another two
hours tying and "creasing
down" a series of starched
cravats until perfection was
achieved. But first of all
two hours were spent
scrubbing himself with
fetish zeal from head to toe
in milk, water and eau de
Cologne. . . . Beau
Brummell said he used
only the froth of
champagne to polish his
Hessian boots. He had
365 snuff boxes, those
suitable for summer wear
being quite unthinkable in
winter, and the fit of his
gloves was achieved by
entrusting their cut to two
firms—one for the fingers,
the other for the thumbs.The Dandy • 49
their disdain for convention: Théophile Gautier's red vest, Oscar Wilde's
green velvet suit, Andy Warhol's silver wigs. The great English Prime Min-
ister Benjamin Disraeli had two magnificent canes, one for morning, one
for evening; at noon he would change canes, no matter where he was. The
female Dandy works similarly. She may adopt male clothing, say, but if she
does, a touch here or there will set her truly apart: no man ever dressed
quite like George Sand. The overtall hat, the riding boots worn on the
streets of Paris, made her a sight to behold.
Remember, there must be a reference point. If your visual style is to-
tally unfamiliar, people will think you at best an obvious attention-getter, at
worst crazy. Instead, create your own fashion sense by adapting and altering
prevailing styles to make yourself an object of fascination. Do this right and
you will be wildly imitated. The Count d'Orsay, a great London dandy of
the 1830s and 1840s, was closely watched by fashionable people; one day,
caught in a sudden London rainstorm, he bought a paltrok, a kind of heavy,
hooded duffle coat, off the back of a Dutch sailor. The paltrok immediately
became the coat to wear. Having people imitate you, of course, is a sign of
your powers of seduction.
The nonconformity of Dandies, however, goes far beyond appearances.
It is an attitude toward life that sets them apart; adopt that attitude and a
circle of followers will form around you.
Dandies are supremely impudent. They don't give a damn about other
people, and never try to please. In the court of Louis XIV, the writer La
Bruyere noticed that courtiers who tried hard to please were invariably on
the way down; nothing was more anti-seductive. As Barbey d'Aurevilly
wrote, "Dandies please women by displeasing them."
Impudence was fundamental to the appeal of Oscar Wilde. In a Lon-
don theater one night, after the first performance of one of Wilde's plays,
the ecstatic audience yelled for the author to appear onstage. Wilde made
them wait and wait, then finally emerged, smoking a cigarette and wearing
an expression of total disdain. "It may be bad manners to appear here
smoking, but it is far worse to disturb me when I am smoking," he scolded
his fans. The Count d'Orsay was equally impudent. At a London club one
night, a Rothschild who was notoriously cheap accidentally dropped a gold
coin on the floor, then bent down to look for it. The count immediately
whipped out a thousand-franc note (worth much more than the coin),
rolled it up, lit it like a candle, and got down on all fours, as if to help light
the way in the search. Only a Dandy could get away with such audacity.
The insolence of the Rake is tied up with his desire to conquer a woman;
he cares for nothing else. The insolence of the Dandy, on the other hand, is
aimed at society and its conventions. It is not a woman he cares to conquer
but a whole group, an entire social world. And since people are generally
oppressed by the obligation of always being polite and self-sacrificing, they
are delighted to spend time around a person who disdains such niceties.
Dandies are masters of the art of living. They live for pleasure, not for
work; they surround themselves with beautiful objects and eat and drinkSometimes, however, the
tyranny of elegance became
altogether insupportable. A
Mr. Boothby committed
suicide and left a note
saying he could no longer
endure the ennui of
buttoning and unbuttoning.
—THE GAME OF HEARTS:
HARRIETTE WILSON'S
MEMOIRS, EDITED BY LESLEY
BLANCH
This royal manner which
[the dandy] raises to the
height of true royalty, the
dandy has taken this from
women, who alone seem
naturally made for such a
role. It is a somewhat by
using the manner and the
method of women that
the dandy dominates. And
this usurpation of
femininity, he makes
women themselves approve
of this. . . . The dandy
has something antinatural
and androgynous about
him, which is precisely how
he is able to endlessly
seduce.
—JULES LEMAÎTRE,
LES CONTEMPORAINS50 • The Art of Seduction
with the same relish they show for their clothes. This was how the great
Roman writer Petronius, author of the Satyricon, was able to seduce the
emperor Nero. Unlike the dull Seneca, the great Stoic thinker and Nero's
tutor, Petronius knew how to make every detail of life a grand aesthetic ad-
venture, from a feast to a simple conversation. This is not an attitude you
should impose on those around you—you can't make yourself a nuisance—
but if you simply seem socially confident and sure of your taste, people will
be drawn to you. The key is to make everything an aesthetic choice. Your
ability to alleviate boredom by making life an art will make your company
highly prized.
The opposite sex is a strange country we can never know, and this ex-
cites us, creates the proper sexual tension. But it is also a source of annoy-
ance and frustration. Men do not understand how women think, and vice
versa; each tries to make the other act more like a member of their own
sex. Dandies may never try to please, but in this one area they have a pleas-
ing effect: by adopting psychological traits of the opposite sex, they appeal
to our inherent narcissism. Women identified with Rudolph Valentino's
delicacy and attention to detail in courtship; men identified with Lou
Andreas-Salomé's lack of interest in commitment. In the Heian court of
eleventh-century Japan, Sei Shonagon, the writer of The Pillow Book, was
powerfully seductive for men, especially literary types. She was fiercely in-
dependent, wrote poetry with the best, and had a certain emotional dis-
tance. Men wanted more from her than just to be her friend or companion,
as if she were another man; charmed by her empathy for male psychology,
they fell in love with her. This kind of mental transvestism—the ability to
enter the spirit of the opposite sex, adapt to their way of thinking, mirror
their tastes and attitudes—can be a key element in seduction. It is a way of
mesmerizing your victim.
According to Freud, the human libido is essentially bisexual; most peo-
ple are in some way attracted to people of their own sex, but social con-
straints (varying with culture and historical period) repress these impulses.
The Dandy represents a release from such constraints. In several of Shake-
speare's plays, a young girl (back then, the female roles in the theater were
actually played by male actors) has to go into disguise and dresses up as a
boy, eliciting all kinds of sexual interest from men, who later are delighted
to find out that the boy is actually a girl. (Think, for example, of Rosalind
in As You Like It.) Entertainers such as Josephine Baker (known as the
Chocolate Dandy) and Marlene Dietrich would dress up as men in their acts,
making themselves wildly popular—among men. Meanwhile the slightly
feminized male, the pretty boy, has always been seductive to women. Valen-
tino embodied this quality. Elvis Presley had feminine features (the face, the
hips), wore frilly pink shirts and eye makeup, and attracted the attention of
women early on. The filmmaker Kenneth Anger said of Mick Jagger that it
was "a bisexual charm which constituted an important part of the attrac-
tion he had over young girls . . . and which acted upon their unconscious."
In Western culture for centuries, in fact, feminine beauty has been far moreThe Dandy • 51
fetishized than male beauty, so it is understandable that a feminine-looking
face like that of Montgomery Clift would have more seductive power than
that of John Wayne.
The Dandy figure has a place in politics as well. John F. Kennedy was a
strange mix of the masculine and feminine, virile in his toughness with the
Russians, and in his White House lawn football games, yet feminine in his
graceful and dapper appearance. This ambiguity was a large part of his ap-
peal. Disraeli was an incorrigible Dandy in dress and manner; some were
suspicious of him as a result, but his courage in not caring what people
thought of him also won him respect. And women of course adored him,
for women always adore a Dandy. They appreciated the gentleness of his
manner, his aesthetic sense, his love of clothes—in other words, his femi-
nine qualities. The mainstay of Disraeli's power was in fact a female fan:
Queen Victoria.
Do not be misled by the surface disapproval your Dandy pose may
elicit. Society may publicize its distrust of androgyny (in Christian the-
ology, Satan is often represented as androgynous), but this conceals its
fascination; what is most seductive is often what is most repressed. Learn a
playful dandyism and you will become the magnet for people's dark, unre-
alized yearnings.
The key to such power is ambiguity. In a society where the roles every-
one plays are obvious, the refusal to conform to any standard will excite in-
terest. Be both masculine and feminine, impudent and charming, subtle
and outrageous. Let other people worry about being socially acceptable;
those types are a dime a dozen, and you are after a power greater than they
can imagine.
Symbol: The
Orchid. Its shape and color oddly sug-
gest both sexes, its odor is sweet and decadent
—it is a tropical flower of evil. Delicate and highly cul-
tivated, it is prized for its rarity; it is unlike any other flower.52 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
The Dandy's strength, but also the Dandy's problem, is that he or she
often works through transgressive feelings relating to sex roles. Al-
though this activity is highly charged and seductive, it is also dangerous,
since it touches on a source of great anxiety and insecurity. The greater
dangers will often come from your own sex. Valentino had immense appeal
for women, but men hated him. He was constantly dogged with accusa-
tions of being perversely unmasculine, and this caused him great pain. Sa-
lomé was equally disliked by women; Nietzsche's sister, and perhaps his
closest friend, considered her an evil witch, and led a virulent campaign
against her in the press long after the philosopher's death. There is little to
be done in the face of resentment like this. Some Dandies try to fight the
image they themselves have created, but this is unwise: to prove his mas-
culinity, Valentino would engage in a boxing match, anything to prove his
masculinity. He wound up looking only desperate. Better to accept society's
occasional gibes with grace and insolence. After all, the Dandies' charm is
that they don't really care what people think of them. That is how Andy
Warhol played the game: when people tired of his antics or some scandal
erupted, instead of trying to defend himself he would simply move on to
some new image—decadent bohemian, high-society portraitist, etc.—as if
to say, with a hint of disdain, that the problem lay not with him but with
other people's attention span.
Another danger for the Dandy is the fact that insolence has its limits.
Beau Brummel prided himself on two things: his trimness of figure and his
acerbic wit. His main social patron was the Prince of Wales, who, in later
years, grew plump. One night at dinner, the prince rang for the butler, and
Brummel snidely remarked, "Do ring, Big Ben." The prince did not ap-
preciate the joke, had Brummel shown out, and never spoke to him again.
Without royal patronage, Brummel fell into poverty and madness.
Even a Dandy, then, must measure out his impudence. A true Dandy
knows the difference between a theatrically staged teasing of the powerful
and a remark that will truly hurt, offend, or insult. It is particularly impor-
tant to avoid insulting those in a position to injure you. In fact the pose
may work best for those who can afford to offend—artists, bohemians, etc.
In the work world, you will probably have to modify and tone down your
Dandy image. Be pleasantly different, an amusement, rather than a person
who challenges the group's conventions and makes others feel insecure.Child-
hood is the golden paradise we
are always consciously or unconsciously try-
ing to re-create. The Natural embodies the longed-
for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease,
caught up in their playful spirit, transported back to that
golden age. Naturals also make a virtue out of weakness, elicit-
ing our sympathy for their trials, making us want to protect
them and help them. As with a child, much of this is natu-
ral, but some of it is exaggerated, a conscious seductive
maneuver. Adopt the pose of the Natural to
neutralize people's natural defensiveness
and infect them with helpless
delight.Psychological Traits of the Natural
Children are not as guileless as we like to imagine. They suffer from
feelings of helplessness, and sense early on the power of their natural
charm to remedy their weakness in the adult world. They learn to play a
game: if their natural innocence can persuade a parent to yield to their de-
sires in one instance, then it is something they can use strategically in an-
other instance, laying it on thick at the right moment to get their way. If
their vulnerability and weakness is so attractive, then it is something they
can use for effect.
Why are we seduced by children's naturalness? First, because anything
natural has an uncanny effect on us. Since the beginning of time, natural
phenomena—such as lightning storms or eclipses—have instilled in human
beings an awe tinged with fear. The more civilized we become, the greater
the effect such natural events have on us; the modern world surrounds us
with so much that is manufactured and artificial that something sudden and
inexplicable fascinates us. Children also have this natural power, but be-
cause they are unthreatening and human, they are not so much awe inspir-
ing as charming. Most people try to please, but the pleasantness of the child
comes effortlessly, defying logical explanation—and what is irrational is
often dangerously seductive.
More important, a child represents a world from which we have been
forever exiled. Because adult life is full of boredom and compromise, we
harbor an illusion of childhood as a kind of golden age, even though it can
often be a period of great confusion and pain. It cannot be denied, how-
ever, that childhood had certain privileges, and as children we had a plea-
surable attitude to life. Confronted with a particularly charming child, we
often feel wistful: we remember our own golden past, the qualities we have
lost and wish we had again. And in the presence of the child, we get a little
of that goldenness back.
Natural seducers are people who somehow avoided getting certain
childish traits drummed out of them by adult experience. Such people can
be as powerfully seductive as any child, because it seems uncanny and mar-
velous that they have preserved such qualities. They are not literally like
children, of course; that would make them obnoxious or pitiful. Rather it
is the spirit that they have retained. Do not imagine that this childishness is
something beyond their control. Natural seducers learn early on the value
of retaining a particular quality, and the seductive power it contains; theyLong-past ages have a
great and often puzzling
attraction for men's
imagination. Whenever
they are dissatisfied with
their present surround-
ings—and this happens
often enough—they turn
back to the past and hope
that they will now be able
to prove the truth of the
inextinguishable dream of
a golden age. They are
probably still under the
spell of their childhood,
which is presented to them
by their not impartial
memory as a time of
uninterrupted bliss.
—SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STASDARD EDITION OF THE
COMPLETE PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS OF SIGMUND FREUD,
VOLUME 23
When Hermes was born
on Mount Cyllene his
mother Maia laid him in
swaddling bands on a
winnowing fan, but he
grew with astonishing
quickness into a little boy,
and as soon as her back
was turned, slipped off and
went looking for adventure.
Arrived at Pieria, where
Apollo was tending a fine
herd of cows, he decided to
5556 • The Art of Seduction
adapt and build upon those childlike traits that they managed to preserve,
exactly as the child learns to play with its natural charm. This is the key. It
is within your power to do the same, since there is lurking within all of us a
devilish child straining to be let loose. To do this successfully, you have to
be able to let go to a degree, since there is nothing less natural than seeming
hesitant. Remember the spirit you once had; let it return, without self-
consciousness. People are much more forgiving of those who go all the
way, who seem uncontrollably foolish, than the halfhearted adult with a
childish streak. Remember who you were before you became so polite and
self-effacing. To assume the role of the Natural, mentally position yourself
in any relationship as the child, the younger one.
The following are the main types of the adult Natural. Keep in mind
that the greatest natural seducers are often a blend of more than one of
these qualities.
The innocent. The primary qualities of innocence are weakness and mis-
understanding of the world. Innocence is weak because it is doomed to
vanish in a harsh, cruel world; the child cannot protect or hold on to its in-
nocence. The misunderstandings come from the child's not knowing about
good and evil, and seeing everything through uncorrupted eyes. The weak-
ness of children elicits sympathy, their misunderstandings make us laugh,
and nothing is more seductive than a mixture of laughter and sympathy.
The adult Natural is not truly innocent—it is impossible to grow up in
this world and retain total innocence. Yet Naturals yearn so deeply to hold
on to their innocent outlook that they manage to preserve the illusion of
innocence. They exaggerate their weakness to elicit the proper sympathy.
They act like they still see the world through innocent eyes, which in an
adult proves doubly humorous. Much of this is conscious, but to be effec-
tive, adult Naturals must make it seem subtle and effortless—if they are
seen as trying to act innocent, it will come across as pathetic. It is better for
them to communicate weakness indirectly, through looks and glances, or
through the situations they get themselves into, rather than anything obvi-
ous. Since this type of innocence is mostly an act, it is easily adaptable for
your own purposes. Learn to play up any natural weaknesses or flaws.
The imp. Impish children have a fearlessness that we adults have lost. That
is because they do not see the possible consequences of their actions—how
some people might be offended, how they might physically hurt themselves
in the process. Imps are brazen, blissfully uncaring. They infect you with
their lighthearted spirit. Such children have not yet had their natural energy
and spirit scolded out of them by the need to be polite and civil. Secretly,
we envy them; we want to be naughty too.
Adult imps are seductive because of how different they are from the rest
of us. Breaths of fresh air in a cautious world, they go full throttle, as ifsteal them. But, fearing to
be betrayed by their tracks,
he quickly made a number
oj shoes from the bark of a
fallen oak and tied them
until plaited grass to the
feet of the cows, which he
then drove off by night
along the road. Apollo
discovered the loss, but
Hermes's trick deceived
him, and though he went
as far as Pylus in his
westward search, and to
Onchestus in his eastern,
he was forced, in the end,
to offer a reward for the
apprehension of the thief.
Silenus and his satyrs,
greedy of reward, spread
out in different directions to
track him down but, for a
long while, without success.
At last, as a party of them
passed through Arcadia,
they heard the muffled
sound of music such as
they had never heard
before, and the nymph
Cyllene, from the mouth of
a cave, told them that a
most gifted child had
recently been born there, to
whom she was acting as
nurse: he had constructed
an ingenious musical toy
from the shell of a tortoise
and some cow-gut, with
which he had lulled his
mother to sleep. • "And
from whom did he get the
cow-gut?" asked the alert
satyrs, noticing two hides
stretched outside the cave.
"Do you charge the poor
child with theft?" asked
Cyllene. Harsh words were
exchanged. • At that
moment Apollo came up,
having discovered the
thief's identity by observing
the suspicious behaviour of
a long-winged bird.
Entering the cave, he
awakened Maia and told
her severely that Hermes
must restore the stolen
cows. Maia pointed to the
child, still wrapped in hisThe Natural • 57
their impishness were uncontrollable, and thus natural. If you play the part,
do not worry about offending people now and then—you are too lovable
and inevitably they will forgive you. Just don't apologize or look contrite,
for that would break the spell. Whatever you say or do, keep a glint in your
eye to show that you do not take anything seriously.
The wonder. A wonder child has a special, inexplicable talent: a gift for
music, for mathematics, for chess, for sport. At work in the field in which
they have such prodigal skill, these children seem possessed, and their ac-
tions effortless. If they are artists or musicians, Mozart types, their work
seems to spring from some inborn impulse, requiring remarkably little
thought. If it is a physical talent that they have, they are blessed with un-
usual energy, dexterity, and spontaneity. In both cases they seem talented
beyond their years. This fascinates us.
Adult wonders are often former wonder children who have managed,
remarkably, to retain their youthful impulsiveness and improvisational skills.
True spontaneity is a delightful rarity, for everything in life conspires to rob
us of it—we have to learn to act carefully and deliberately, to think about
how we look in other people's eyes. To play the wonder you need some
skill that seems easy and natural, along with the ability to improvise. If in
fact your skill takes practice, you must hide this and learn to make your
work appear effortless. The more you hide the sweat behind what you do,
the more natural and seductive it will appear.
The undefensive lover. As people get older, they protect themselves against
painful experiences by closing themselves off. The price for this is that they
grow rigid, physically and mentally. But children are by nature unprotected
and open to experience, and this receptiveness is extremely attractive. In
the presence of children we become less rigid, infected with their open-
ness. That is why we want to be around them.
Undefensive lovers have somehow circumvented the self-protective
process, retaining the playful, receptive spirit of the child. They often
manifest this spirit physically: they are graceful, and seem to age less rapidly
than other people. Of all the Natural's character qualities, this one is the
most useful. Defensiveness is deadly in seduction; act defensive and you'll
bring out defensiveness in other people. The undefensive lover, on the
other hand, lowers the inhibitions of his or her target, a critical part of se-
duction. It is important to learn to not react defensively: bend instead of
resist, be open to influence from others, and they will more easily fall under
your spell.swaddling bands and
feigning sleep. "What an
absurd charge!" she cried.
But Apollo had already
recognized the hides. He
picked up Hermes, carried
him to Olympus, and there
formally accused him of
theft, offering the hides as
evidence. Zeus, loth to
believe that his own new-
born son was a thief
encouraged him to plead
not guilty, but Apollo
would not be put off and
Hermes, at last, weakened
and confessed. • "Very
well, come with me," he
said, "and you may have
your herd. I slaughtered
only two, and those I cut
up into twelve equal
portions as a sacrifice to the
twelve gods" • "Twelve
gods?" asked Apollo.
"Who is the twelfth?" •
"Your servant, sir" replied
Hermes modestly. "I ate
no more than my share,
though I was very hungry,
and duly burned the rest. "
• The two gods [ Hermes
and Apollo] returned to
Mount Cyllene, where
Hermes greeted his mother
and retrieved something
that he had hidden
underneath a sheepskin. •
"What have you there?"
asked Apollo. • In answer,
Hermes showed his newly-
invented tortoise-shell lyre,
and played such a
ravishing tune on it with
the plectrum he had also
invented, at the same time
singing in praise of
Apollo's nobility,
intelligence, and generosity,
that he was forgiven at
once. He led the surprised
and delighted Apollo to
Pylus, playing all the way,
and there gave him the
remainder of the cattle,
which he had hidden in a
cave. • "A bargain!" cried
Apollo. "You keep the
cows, and I take the lyre. "58 • The Art of Seduction
Examples of Natural Seducers
1. As a child growing up in England, Charlie Chaplin spent years in dire
poverty, particularly after his mother was committed to an asylum. In his
early teens, forced to work to live, he landed a job in vaudeville, eventually
gaining some success as a comedian. But Chaplin was wildly ambitious, and
so, in 1910, when he was only nineteen, he emigrated to the United States,
hoping to break into the film business. Making his way to Hollywood, he
found occasional bit parts, but success seemed elusive: the competition was
fierce, and although Chaplin had a repertoire of gags that he had learned in
vaudeville, he did not particularly excel at physical humor, a critical part of
silent comedy. He was not a gymnast like Buster Keaton.
In 1914, Chaplin managed to get the lead in a film short called Making
a Living. His role was that of a con artist. In playing around with the cos-
tume for the part, he put on a pair of pants several sizes too large, then
added a derby hat, enormous boots that he wore on the wrong feet, a walk-
ing cane, and a pasted-on mustache. With the clothes, a whole new charac-
ter seemed to come to life—first the silly walk, then the twirling of the
cane, then all sorts of gags. Mack Sennett, the head of the studio, did not
find Making a Living very funny, and doubted whether Chaplin had a future
in the movies, but a few critics felt otherwise. A review in a trade magazine
read, "The clever player who takes the role of a nervy and very nifty
sharper in this picture is a comedian of the first water, who acts like one of
Nature's own naturals." And audiences also responded—the film made
money.
What seemed to touch a nerve in Making a Living, setting Chaplin apart
from the horde of other comedians working in silent film, was the almost
pathetic naiveté of the character he played. Sensing he was onto something,
Chaplin shaped the role further in subsequent movies, rendering him more
and more naive. The key was to make the character seem to see the world
through the eyes of a child. In The Bank, he is the bank janitor who day-
dreams of great deeds while robbers are at work in the building; in The
Pawnbroker, he is an unprepared shop assistant who wreaks havoc on a
grandfather clock; in Shoulder Arms, he is a soldier in the bloody trenches of
World War I, reacting to the horrors of war like an innocent child. Chaplin
made sure to cast actors in his films who were physically larger than he was,
subliminally positioning them as adult bullies and himself as the helpless in-
fant. And as he went deeper into his character, something strange hap-
pened: the character and the real-life man began to merge. Although he
had had a troubled childhood, he was obsessed with it. (For his film Easy
Street he built a set in Hollywood that duplicated the London streets he had
known as a boy.) He mistrusted the adult world, preferring the company of
the young, or the young at heart: three of his four wives were teenagers
when he married them.
More than any other comedian, Chaplin aroused a mix of laughter and
sentiment. He made you empathize with him as the victim, feel sorry for• "Agreed," said Hermes,
and they shook hands on
it. • . . . Apollo, taking
the child back to Olympus,
told Zeus all that had
happened. Zeus warned
Hermes that henceforth he
must respect the rights oj
property and refrain from
telling downright lies; but
he could not help being
amused. "You seem to be a
very ingenious, eloquent,
and persuasive godling," he
said. • "Then make me
your herald, Father,"
Hermes answered, "and I
will he responsible for the
safety of all divine
property, and never tell lies,
though I cannot promise
always to tell the whole
truth." • "That would not
be expected of you," said
Zeus with a smile. . . .
Zeus gave him a herald's
staff with white ribbons,
which everyone was ordered
to respect; a round hat
against the rain, and
winged golden sandals
which carried him about
with the swiftness of the
wind.
—ROBERT GRAVES,
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOLUME I
A man may meet a woman
and be shocked by her
ugliness. Soon, if she is
natural and unaffected, her
expression makes him
overlook the fault of her
features. He begins to find
her charming, it enters his
head that she might be
loved, and a week later he
is living in hope. The
following week he has been
snubbed into despair, and
the week afterwards he has
gone mad.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALEThe Natural • 59
him the way you would for a lost dog. You both laughed and cried. And
audiences sensed that the role Chaplin played came from somewhere deep
inside—that he was sincere, that he was actually playing himself. Within
a few years after Making a Living, Chaplin was the most famous actor
in the world. There were Chaplin dolls, comic books, toys; popular songs
and short stories were written about him; he became a universal icon. In
1921, when he returned to London for the first time since he had left it, he
was greeted by enormous crowds, as if at the triumphant return of a great
general.
The greatest seducers, those who seduce mass audiences, nations, the
world, have a way of playing on people's unconscious, making them react
in a way they can neither understand nor control. Chaplin inadvertently hit
on this power when he discovered the effect he could have on audiences by
playing up his weakness, by suggesting that he had a child's mind in an adult
body. In the early twentieth century, the world was radically and rapidly
changing. People were working longer and longer hours at increasingly
mechanical jobs; life was becoming steadily more inhuman and heartless, as
the ravages of World War I made clear. Caught in the midst of revolution-
ary change, people yearned for a lost childhood that they imagined as a
golden paradise.
An adult child like Chaplin has immense seductive power, for he offers
the illusion that life was once simpler and easier, and that for a moment, or
for as long as the movie lasts, you can win that life back. In a cruel, amoral
world, naivete has enormous appeal. The key is to bring it off with an air
of total seriousness, as the straight man does in stand-up comedy. More im-
portant, however, is the creation of sympathy. Overt strength and power is
rarely seductive—it makes us afraid, or envious. The royal road to seduction
is to play up your vulnerability and helplessness. You cannot make this ob-
vious; to seem to be begging for sympathy is to seem needy, which is en-
tirely anti-seductive. Do not proclaim yourself a victim or underdog, but
reveal it in your manner, in your confusion. A display of "natural" weak-
ness will make you instantly lovable, both lowering people's defenses and
making them feel delightfully superior to you. Put yourself in situations
that make you seem weak, in which someone else has the advantage; they
are the bully, you are the innocent lamb. Without any effort on your part,
people will feel sympathy for you. Once people's eyes cloud over with
sentimental mist, they will not see how you are manipulating them.
2. Emma Crouch, born in 1842 in Plymouth, England, came from a re-
spectable middle-class family. Her father was a composer and music profes-
sor who dreamed of success in the world of light opera. Among his many
children, Emma was his favorite: she was a delightful child, lively and flirta-
tious, with red hair and a freckled face. Her father doted on her, and prom-
ised her a brilliant future in the theater. Unfortunately Mr. Crouch had a"Geographical" escapism
has been rendered
ineffective by the spread of
air routes. What remains is
"evolutionary" escapism—
a downward course in one's
development, back to the
ideas and emotions of
"golden childhood," which
may well be defined as
"regress towards
infantilism," escape to a
personal world of childish
ideas. • In a strictly-
regulated society, where life
follows strictly-defined
canons, the urge to escape
from the chain of things
"established once and for
all" must be felt
particularly strongly. . . . •
And the most perfect of
them [comedians] does this
with utmost perfection, for
he [Chaplin] serves this
principle . . . through the
subtlety of his method
which, offering the
spectactor an infantile
pattern to be imitated,
pscyhologically infects him
with infantilism and draws
him into the "golden age"
of the infantile paradise of
childhood.
—SERGEI EISENSTEIN, "CHARLIE
THE KID," FROM NOTES OF A
FILM DIRECTOR60 • The Art of Seduction
dark side: he was an adventurer, a gambler, and a rake, and in 1849 he
abandoned his family and left for America. The Crouches were now in dire
straits. Emma was told that her father had died in an accident and she was
sent off to a convent. The loss of her father affected her deeply, and as the
years went by she seemed lost in the past, acting as if he still doted on her.
One day in 1856, when Emma was walking home from church, a well-
dressed gentleman invited her home for some cakes. She followed him to
his house, where he proceeded to take advantage of her. The next morning
this man, a diamond merchant, promised to set her up in a house of her
own, treat her well, and give her plenty of money. She took the money but
left him, determined to do what she had always wanted: never see her
family again, never depend on anyone, and lead the grand life that her fa-
ther had promised her.
With the money the diamond merchant had given her, Emma bought
nice clothes and rented a cheap flat. Adopting the flamboyant name of
Cora Pearl, she began to frequent London's Argyll Rooms, a fancy gin
palace where harlots and gentlemen rubbed elbows. The proprietor of the
Argyll, a Mr. Bignell, took note of this newcomer to his establishment—
she was so brazen for a young girl. At forty-five, he was much older
than she was, but he decided to be her lover and protector, lavishing her
with money and attention. The following year he took her to Paris, which
was at the height of its Second Empire prosperity. Cora was enthralled by
Paris, and of all its sights, but what impressed her the most was the parade
of rich coaches in the Bois de Boulogne. Here the fashionable came to take
the air—the empress, the princesses, and, not least the grand courtesans,
who had the most opulent carriages of all. This was the way to lead the
kind of life Cora's father had wanted for her. She promptly told Bignell that
when he went back to London, she would stay on alone.
Frequenting all the right places, Cora soon came to the attention of
wealthy French gentlemen. They would see her walking the streets in a
bright pink dress, to complement her flaming red hair, pale face, and freck-
les. They would glimpse her riding wildly through the Bois de Boulogne,
cracking her whip left and right. They would see her in cafes surrounded
by men, her witty insults making them laugh. They also heard of her
exploits—of her delight in showing her body to one and all. The elite of
Paris society began to court her, particularly the older men who had grown
tired of the cold and calculating courtesans, and who admired her girlish
spirit. As money began to pour in from her various conquests (the Duc de
Mornay, heir to the Dutch throne; Prince Napoleon, cousin to the Em-
peror), Cora spent it on the most outrageous things—a multicolored car-
riage pulled by a team of cream-colored horses, a rose-marble bathtub with
her initials inlaid in gold. Gentlemen vied to be the one who would spoil
her the most. An Irish lover wasted his entire fortune on her, in only eight
weeks. But money could not buy Cora's loyalty; she would leave a man on
the slightest whim.
Cora Pearl's wild behavior and disdain for etiquette had all of Paris onPrince Gortschakoff used
to say that she [Cora
Pearl] was the last word in
luxury, and that he would
have tried to steal the sun
to satisfy one of her whims.
—GUSTAVE CLAUDIN, CORA
PEARL CONTEMPORARY
Apparently the possession of
humor implies the
possession of a number of
typical habit-systems. The
first is an emotional one: the
habit of playfulness. Why
should one be proud of
being playful? For a double
reason. First, playfulness
connotes childhood and
youth. If one can be playful,
one still possesses something
of the vigor and the joy of
young life . . . • But there
is a deeper implication. To
be playful is, in a sense, to
be free. When a person is
playful, he momentarily
disregards the binding
necessities which compel
him, in business and morals,
in domestic and community
life. . . . • What galls us is
that the binding necessities
do not permit us to shape
our world as we please. . . .
What we most deeply
desire, however, is to create
our world for ourselves.
Whenever we can do
that, even in the slightest
degree, we are happy. Now
in play we create our own
world. . . .
—PROFESSOR H.A.
OVERSTREET, INFLUENCING
HUMAN BEHAVIORThe Natural • 61
edge. In 1864, she was to appear as Cupid in the Offenbach operetta Or-
pheus in the Underworld. Society was dying to see what she would do to
cause a sensation, and soon found out: she came on stage practically naked,
except for expensive diamonds here and there, barely covering her. As she
pranced on stage, the diamonds fell off, each one worth a fortune; she did
not stoop to pick them up, but let them roll off into the footlights. The
gentlemen in the audience, some of whom had given her those diamonds,
applauded her wildly. Antics like this made Cora the toast of Paris, and she
reigned as the city's supreme courtesan for over a decade, until the Franco-
Prussian War of 1870 put an end to the Second Empire.
People often mistakenly believe that what makes a person desirable and se-
ductive is physical beauty, elegance, or overt sexuality. Yet Cora Pearl was
not dramatically beautiful; her body was boyish, and her style was garish
and tasteless. Even so, the most dashing men of Europe vied for her favors,
often ruining themselves in the process. It was Cora's spirit and attitude that
enthralled them. Spoiled by her father, she imagined that spoiling her was
natural—that all men should do the same. The consequence was that, like a
child, she never felt she had to try to please. It was Cora's powerful air of
independence that made men want to possess her, tame her. She never pre-
tended to be anything more than a courtesan, so the brazenness that in a
lady would have been uncivil in her seemed natural and fun. And as with a
spoiled child, a man's relationship with her was on her terms. The moment
he tried to change that, she lost interest. This was the secret of her astound-
ing success.
Spoiled children have an undeservedly bad reputation: while those who
are spoiled with material things are indeed often insufferable, those who are
spoiled with affection know themselves to be deeply seductive. This be-
comes a distinct advantage when they grow up. According to Freud (who
was speaking from experience, since he was his mother's darling), spoiled
children have a confidence that stays with them all their lives. This quality
radiates outward, drawing others to them, and, in a circular process, making
people spoil them still more. Since their spirit and natural energy were
never tamed by a disciplining parent, as adults they are adventurous and
bold, and often impish or brazen.
The lesson is simple: it may be too late to be spoiled by a parent, but it
is never too late to make other people spoil you. It is all in your attitude.
People are drawn to those who expect a lot out of life, whereas they tend
to disrespect those who are fearful and undemanding. Wild independence
has a provocative effect on us: it appeals to us, while also presenting us with
a challenge—we want to be the one to tame it, to make the spirited person
dependent on us. Half of seduction is stirring such competitive desires.
3. In October of 1925, Paris society was all excited about the opening of
the Revue Negre. Jazz, or in fact anything that came from black America,All was quiet again. (Genji
slipped the latch open and
tried the doors. They had
not been bolted. A curtain
had been set up just inside,
and in the dim light he
could make out Chinese
chests and other furniture
scattered in some disorder.
He made his way through
to her side. She lay by
herself, a slight little figure.
Though vaguely annoyed
at being disturbed, she
evidently took him for
the woman Chujo until he
pulled back the covers.
• ... His manner was so
gently persuasive that
devils and demons could
not have gainsaid him.
• ... She was so small
that he lifted her easily. As
he passed through the doors
to his own room, he came
upon Chujo who had been
summoned earlier. He
called out in surprise.
Surprised in turn, Chujo
peered into the darkness.
The perfume that came
from his robes like a cloud
of smoke told her who he
was. . . . [Chujo] followed
after, but Genji was quite
unmoved by her pleas. •
"Come for her in the
morning," he said, sliding
the doors closed. • The
lady was bathed in
perspiration and quite
beside herself at the
thought of what Chujo,
and the others too, would
be thinking. Genji had to
feel sorry for her. Yet the
sweet words poured forth,
the whole gamut of pretty
devices for making a
woman surrender. . . . •
One may imagine that
he found many kind
promises with which to
comfort her. . . .
—MURASAKI SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER62 • The Art of Seduction
was the latest fashion, and the Broadway dancers and performers who made
up the Revue Nègre were African-American. On opening night, artists
and high society packed the hall. The show was spectacular, as they ex-
pected, but nothing prepared them for the last number, performed by a
somewhat gawky long-legged woman with the prettiest face: Josephine
Baker, a twenty-year-old chorus girl from East St. Louis. She came onstage
bare-breasted, wearing a skirt of feathers over a satin bikini bottom, with
feathers around her neck and ankles. Although she performed her number,
called "Danse Sauvage," with another dancer, also clad in feathers, all eyes
were riveted on her: her whole body seemed to come alive in a way the au-
dience had never seen before, her legs moving with the litheness of a cat,
her rear end gyrating in patterns that one critic likened to a hummingbird's.
As the dance went on, she seemed possessed, feeding off the crowd's ecsta-
tic reaction. And then there was the look on her face: she was having such
fun. She radiated a joy that made her erotic dance oddly innocent, even
slightly comic.
By the following day, word had spread: a star was born. Josephine be-
came the heart of the Revue Nègre, and Paris was at her feet. Within a
year, her face was on posters everywhere; there were Josephine Baker per-
fumes, dolls, clothes; fashionable Frenchwomen were slicking their hair
back a la Baker, using a product called Bakerfix. They were even trying to
darken their skin.
Such sudden fame represented quite a change, for just a few years ear-
lier, Josephine had been a young girl growing up in East St. Louis, one of
America's worst slums. She had gone to work at the age of eight, cleaning
houses for a white woman who beat her. She had sometimes slept in a rat-
infested basement; there had never been heat in the winter. (She had taught
herself to dance in her wild fashion to help keep herself warm.) In 1919,
Josephine had run away and become a part-time vaudeville performer,
landing in New York two years later without money or connections. She
had had some success as a clowning chorus girl, providing comic relief with
her crossed eyes and screwed-up face, but she hadn't stood out. Then she
was invited to Paris. Some other black performers had declined, fearing
things might be still worse for them in France than in America, but
Josephine jumped at the chance.
Despite her success with the Revue Nègre, Josephine did not delude
herself: Parisians were notoriously fickle. She decided to turn the relation-
ship around. First, she refused to be aligned with any club, and developed a
reputation for breaking contracts at will, making it clear that she was ready
to leave in an instant. Since childhood she had been afraid of dependence
on anyone; now no one could take her for granted. This only made impre-
sarios chase her and the public appreciate her the more. Second, she was
aware that although black culture had become the vogue, what the French
had fallen in love with was a kind of caricature. If that was what it took
to be successful, so be it, but Josephine made it clear that she did not take
the caricature seriously; instead she reversed it, becoming the ultimateThe Natural • 63
Frenchwoman of fashion, a caricature not of blackness but of whiteness.
Everything was a role to play—the comedienne, the primitive dancer, the
ultrastylish Parisian. And everything Josephine did, she did with such a light
spirit, such a lack of pretension, that she continued to seduce the jaded
French for years. Her funeral, in 1975, was nationally televised, a huge cul-
tural event. She was buried with the kind of pomp normally reserved only
for heads of state.
From very early on, Josephine Baker could not stand the feeling of having
no control over the world. Yet what could she do in the face of her un-
promising circumstances? Some young girls put all their hopes on a hus-
band, but Josephine's father had left her mother soon after she was born,
and she saw marriage as something that would only make her more misera-
ble. Her solution was something children often do: confronted with a
hopeless environment, she closed herself off in a world of her own making,
oblivious to the ugliness around her. This world was filled with dancing,
clowning, dreams of great things. Let other people wail and moan; Jose-
phine would smile, remain confident and self-reliant. Almost everyone who
met her, from her earliest years to her last, commented on how seductive
this quality was. Her refusal to compromise, or to be what she was expected
to be, made everything she did seem authentic and natural.
A child loves to play, and to create a little self-contained world. When
children are absorbed in make believe, they are hopelessly charming. They
infuse their imaginings with such seriousness and feeling. Adult Naturals do
something similar, particularly if they are artists: they create their own fan-
tasy world, and live in it as if it were the real one. Fantasy is so much more
pleasant than reality, and since most people do not have the power or
courage to create such a world, they enjoy being around those who do. Re-
member: the role you were given in life is not the role you have to accept.
You can always live out a role of your own creation, a role that fits your
fantasy. Learn to play with your image, never taking it too seriously. The
key is to infuse your play with the conviction and feeling of a child, making
it seem natural. The more absorbed you seem in your own joy-filled world,
the more seductive you become. Do not go halfway: make the fantasy you
inhabit as radical and exotic as possible, and you will attract attention like a
magnet.
4. It was the Festival of the Cherry Blossom at the Heian court, in late-
tenth-century Japan. In the emperor's palace, many of the courtiers were
drunk, and others were fast asleep, but the young princess Oborozukiyo,
the emperor's sister-in-law, was awake and reciting a poem: "What can
compare with a misty moon of spring?" Her voice was smooth and deli-
cate. She moved to the door of her apartment to look at the moon. Then,
suddenly, she smelled something sweet, and a hand clutched the sleeve of
her robe. "Who are you?" she said, frightened. "There is nothing to be64 • The Art of Seduction
afraid of," came a man's voice, and continued with a poem of his own:
"Late in the night we enjoy a misty moon. There is nothing misty about
the bond between us." Without another word, the man pulled the princess
to him and picked her up, carrying her into a gallery outside her room,
sliding the door closed behind him. She was terrified, and tried to call for
help. In the darkness she heard him say, a little louder now, "It will do you
no good. I am always allowed my way. Just be quiet, if you will, please."
Now the princess recognized the voice, and the scent: it was Genji, the
young son of the late emperor's concubine, whose robes bore a distinctive
perfume. This calmed her somewhat, since the man was someone she
knew, but on the other hand she also knew of his reputation: Genji was the
court's most incorrigible seducer, a man who stopped at nothing. He was
drunk, it was near dawn, and the watchmen would soon be on their
rounds; she did not want to be discovered with him. But then she began to
make out the outlines of his face—so pretty, his look so sincere, without a
trace of malice. Then came more poems, recited in that charming voice,
the words so insinuating. The images he conjured filled her mind, and dis-
tracted her from his hands. She could not resist him.
As the light began to rise, Genji got to his feet. He said a few tender
words, they exchanged fans, and then he quickly left. The serving women
were coming through the emperor's rooms by now, and when they saw
Genji scurrying away, the perfume of his robes lingering after him, they
smiled, knowing he was up to his usual tricks; but they never imagined he
would dare approach the sister of the emperor's wife.
In the days that followed, Oborozukiyo could only think of Genji. She
knew he had other mistresses, but when she tried to put him out of her
mind, a letter from him would arrive, and she would be back to square one.
In truth, she had started the correspondence, haunted by his midnight visit.
She had to see him again. Despite the risk of discovery, and the fact that
her sister Kokiden, the emperor's wife, hated Genji, she arranged for fur-
ther trysts in her apartment. But one night an envious courtier found them
together. Word reached Kokiden, who naturally was furious. She de-
manded that Genji be banished from court and the emperor had no choice
but to agree.
Genji went far away, and things settled down. Then the emperor died
and his son took over. A kind of emptiness had come to the court: the
dozens of women whom Genji had seduced could not endure his absence,
and flooded him with letters. Even women who had never known him in-
timately would weep over any relic he had left behind—a robe, for in-
stance, in which his scent still lingered. And the young emperor missed his
jocular presence. And the princesses missed the music he had played on the
koto. And Oborozukiyo pined for his midnight visits. Finally even Kokiden
broke down, realizing that she could not resist him. So Genji was sum-
moned back to the court. And not only was he forgiven, he was given a
hero's welcome; the young emperor himself greeted the scoundrel with
tears in his eyes.The Natural • 65
The story of Genji's life is told in the eleventh-century novel The Tale of
Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court. The
character was most likely based on a real-life man, Fujiwara no Korechika.
Indeed another book of the period, The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, de-
scribes an encounter between the female author and Korechika, and reveals
his incredible charm and his almost hypnotic effect on women. Genji is a
Natural, an undefensive lover, a man who has a lifelong obsession with
women but whose appreciation of and affection for them makes him irre-
sistible. As he says to Oborozukiyo in the novel, "I am always allowed my
way." This self-belief is half of Genji's charm. Resistance does not make
him defensive; he retreats gracefully, reciting a little poetry, and as he leaves,
the perfume of his robes trailing behind him, his victim wonders why she
has been so afraid, and what she is missing by spurning him, and she finds a
way to let him know that the next time things will be different. Genji takes
nothing seriously or personally, and at the age of forty, an age at which
most men of the eleventh century were already looking old and worn, he
still seems like a boy. His seductive powers never leave him.
Human beings are immensely suggestible; their moods will easily spread
to the people around them. In fact seduction depends on mimesis, on the
conscious creation of a mood or feeling that is then reproduced by the
other person. But hesitation and awkwardness are also contagious, and
are deadly to seduction. If in a key moment you seem indecisive or self-
conscious, the other person will sense that you are thinking of yourself, in-
stead of being overwhelmed by his or her charms. The spell will be broken.
As an undefensive lover, though, you produce the opposite effect: your vic-
tim might be hesitant or worried, but confronted with someone so sure and
natural, he or she will be caught up in the mood. Like dancing with some-
one you lead effortlessly across the dance floor, it is a skill you can learn. It
is a matter of rooting out the fear and awkwardness that have built up in
you over the years, of becoming more graceful with your approach, less de-
fensive when others seem to resist. Often people's resistance is a way of
testing you, and if you show any awkwardness or hesitation, you not only
will fail the test, but you will risk infecting them with your doubts.
Symbol: The
Lamb. So soft and endearing. At
two days old the lamb can gambol gracefully;
within a week it is playing "Follow the Leader."
Its weakness is part of its charm. The Lamb is pure inno-
cence, so innocent we want to possess it, even devour it.66 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
Achildish quality can be charming but it can also be irritating; the inno-
cent have no experience of the world, and their sweetness can prove
cloying. In Milan Kundera's novel The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, the
hero dreams that he is trapped on an island with a group of children. Soon
their wonderful qualities become intensely annoying to him; after a few
days of exposure to them he cannot relate to them at all. The dream turns
into a nightmare, and he longs to be back among adults, with real things to
do and talk about. Because total childishness can quickly grate, the most se-
ductive Naturals are those who, like Josephine Baker, combine adult expe-
rience and wisdom with a childlike manner. It is this mixture of qualities
that is most alluring.
Society cannot tolerate too many Naturals. Given a crowd of Cora
Pearls or Charlie Chaplins, their charm would quickly wear off. In any case
it is usually only artists, or people with abundant leisure time, who can af-
ford to go all the way. The best way to use the Natural character type is in
specific situations when a touch of innocence or impishness will help lower
your target's defenses. A con man plays dumb to make the other person
trust him and feel superior. This kind of feigned naturalness has countless
applications in daily life, where nothing is more dangerous than looking
smarter than the next person; the Natural pose is the perfect way to disguise
your cleverness. But if you are uncontrollably childish and cannot turn it
off, you run the risk of seeming pathetic, earning not sympathy but pity
and disgust.
Similarly, the seductive traits of the Natural work best in one who is
still young enough for them to seem natural. They are much harder for an
older person to pull off. Cora Pearl did not seem so charming when she
was still wearing her pink flouncy dresses in her fifties. The Duke of Buck-
ingham, who seduced everyone in the English court in the 1620s (includ-
ing the homosexual King James I himself), was wondrously childish in
looks and manner; but this became obnoxious and off-putting as he grew
older, and he eventually made enough enemies that he ended up being mur-
dered. As you age, then, your natural qualities should suggest more the
child's open spirit, less an innocence that will no longer convince anyone.The
ability to delay satisfaction is
the ultimate art of seduction—while
waiting, the victim is held in thrall. Coquettes
are the grand masters of this game, orchestrating a
back-and-forth movement between hope and frustration.
They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of physical
pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which,
however, proves elusive; yet this only makes their targets pursue
them the more. Coquettes seem totally self-sufficient: they do
not need you, they seem to say, and their narcissism proves devil-
ishly attractive. You want to conquer them but they hold the cards.
The strategy of the Coquette is never to offer total satisfaction.
Imitate the alternating heat and coolness of the Coquette
and you will keep the seduced at your heels.The Hot and Cold Coquette
In the autumn of 1795, Paris was caught up in a strange giddiness. The
Reign of Terror that had followed the French Revolution had ended; the
sound of the guillotine was gone. The city breathed a collective sigh of re-
lief, and gave way to wild parties and endless festivals.
The young Napoleon Bonaparte, twenty-six at the time, had no inter-
est in such revelries. He had made a name for himself as a bright, audacious
general who had helped quell rebellion in the provinces, but his ambition
was boundless and he burned with desire for new conquests. So when, in
October of that year, the infamous thirty-three-year-old widow Josephine
de Beauharnais visited his offices, he couldn't help but be confused. Jose-
phine was so exotic, and everything about her was languorous and sensual.
(She capitalized on her foreignness—she came from the island of Mar-
tinique.) On the other hand she had a reputation as a loose woman, and the
shy Napoleon believed in marriage. Even so, when Josephine invited him
to one of her weekly soirees, he found himself accepting.
At the soiree he felt totally out of his element. All of the city's great
writers and wits were there, as well as the few of the nobility who had
survived—Josephine herself was a vicomtesse, and had narrowly escaped
the guillotine. The women were dazzling, some of them more beautiful
than the hostess, but all the men congregated around Josephine, drawn by
her graceful presence and queenly manner. Several times she left the men
behind and went to Napoleon's side; nothing could have flattered his inse-
cure ego more than such attention.
He began to pay her visits. Sometimes she would ignore him, and he
would leave in a fit of anger. Yet the next day a passionate letter would ar-
rive from Josephine, and he would rush to see her. Soon he was spending
most of his time with her. Her occasional shows of sadness, her bouts of
anger or of tears, only deepened his attachment. In March of 1796, Napo-
leon married Josephine.
Two days after his wedding, Napoleon left to lead a campaign in northern
Italy against the Austrians. "You are the constant object of my thoughts,"
he wrote to his wife from abroad. "My imagination exhausts itself in guess-
ing what you are doing." His generals saw him distracted: he would leave
meetings early, spend hours writing letters, or stare at the miniature of
Josephine he wore around his neck. He had been driven to this state by the
unbearable distance between them and by a slight coldness he now detectedThere are indeed men who
are attached more by
resistance than by yielding
and who unwittingly prefer
a variable sky, now
splendid, now black and
vexed by lightnings, to
love's unclouded blue. Let
us not forget that Josephine
had to deal with a
conqueror and that love
resembles war. She did not
surrender, she let herself be
conquered. Had she been
more tender, more
attentive, more loving,
perhaps Bonaparte would
have loved her less.
—IMBERT DE SAINT-AMAND,
QUOTED IN THE EMPRESS
JOSEPHINE: NAPOLEON'S
ENCHANTRESS, PHILIP W.
SERGEANT
Coquettes know how to
please; not how to love,
which is why men love
them so much.
—PIERRE MARIVAUX
6970 • The Art of Seduction
in her—she wrote infrequently, and her letters lacked passion; nor did she
join him in Italy. He had to finish his war fast, so that he could return to
her side. Engaging the enemy with unusual zeal, he began to make mis-
takes. "To live for Josephine!" he wrote to her. "I work to get near you; I
kill myself to reach you." His letters became more passionate and erotic; a
friend of Josephine's who saw them wrote, "The handwriting [was] almost
indecipherable, the spelling shaky, the style bizarre and confused .... What
a position for a woman to find herself in—being the motivating force be-
hind the triumphal march of an entire army."
Months went by in which Napoleon begged Josephine to come to Italy
and she made endless excuses. But finally she agreed to come, and left Paris
for Brescia, where he was headquartered. A near encounter with the enemy
along the way, however, forced her to detour to Milan. Napoleon was away
from Brescia, in battle; when he returned to find her still absent, he blamed
his foe General Würmser and swore revenge. For the next few months he
seemed to pursue two targets with equal energy: Wiirmser and Josephine.
His wife was never where she was supposed to be: "I reach Milan, rush to
your house, having thrown aside everything in order to clasp you in my
arms. You are not there!" Napoleon would turn angry and jealous, but
when he finally caught up with Josephine, the slightest of her favors melted
his heart. He took long rides with her in a darkened carriage, while his
generals fumed—meetings were missed, orders and strategies improvised.
"Never," he later wrote to her, "has a woman been in such complete mas-
tery of another's heart." And yet their time together was so short. During a
campaign that lasted almost a year, Napoleon spent a mere fifteen nights
with his new bride.
Napoleon later heard rumors that Josephine had taken a lover while he
was in Italy. His feelings toward her cooled, and he himself took an endless
series of mistresses. Yet Josephine was never really concerned about this
threat to her power over her husband; a few tears, some theatrics, a little
coldness on her part, and he remained her slave. In 1804, he had her
crowned empress, and had she born him a son, she would have remained
empress to the end. When Napoleon lay on his deathbed, the last word he
uttered was "Josephine."
During the French Revolution, Josephine had come within minutes of los-
ing her head on the guillotine. The experience left her without illusions,
and with two goals in mind: to live a life of pleasure, and to find the man
who could best supply it. She set her sights on Napoleon early on. He was
young, and had a brilliant future. Beneath his calm exterior, Josephine
sensed, he was highly emotional and aggressive, but this did not intimidate
her—it only revealed his insecurity and weakness. He would be easy to en-
slave. First, Josephine adapted to his moods, charmed him with her femi-
nine grace, warmed him with her looks and manner. He wanted to possess
her. And once she had aroused this desire, her power lay in postponing its
satisfaction, withdrawing from him, frustrating him. In fact the torture ofAn absence, the declining
of an invitation to dinner,
an unintentional,
unconscious harshness are
of more service than all
the cosmetics and fine
clothes in the world.
—MARCEL PROUST
There's also nightly, to the
unintiated, \ A peril—not
indeed like love or
marriage, \ But not the less
for this to he depreciated: \
It is—I meant and mean
not to disparage \ The
show of virtue even in the
vitiated— \ It adds an
outward grace unto their
carriage— \ But to
denounce the amphibious
sort of harlot, \ Couleur
de rose, who's neither
white nor scarlet. \ Such is
your cold coquette, who
can't say say "no," \And
won't say "yes," and keeps
you on- and off-ing \ On a
lee shore, till it begins to
blow— \ Then sees your
heart wreck'd with an
inward scoffing. \ This
works a world of
sentimental woe, \ And
sends new Werters yearly
to the coffin; \ But yet is
merely innocent flirtation, \
Not quite adultery, but
adulteration.
—LORD BYRON,
THE COLD COQUETTE
There is a way to represent
one's cause and in doing so
to treat the audience in
such a cool and
condescending manner that
they are bound to notice
one is not doing it to please
them. The principle should
always be not to make
concessions to those who
don't have anything to give
but who have everything to
gain from us. We can waitThe Coquette • 71
the chase gave Napoleon a masochistic pleasure. He yearned to subdue her
independent spirit, as if she were an enemy in battle.
People are inherently perverse. An easy conquest has a lower value than
a difficult one; we are only really excited by what is denied us, by what we
cannot possess in full. Your greatest power in seduction is your ability to
turn away, to make others come after you, delaying their satisfaction. Most
people miscalculate and surrender too soon, worried that the other person
will lose interest, or that giving the other what he or she wants will grant
the giver a kind of power. The truth is the opposite: once you satisfy some-
one, you no longer have the initiative, and you open yourself to the possi-
bility that he or she will lose interest at the slightest whim. Remember:
vanity is critical in love. Make your targets afraid that you may be with-
drawing, that you may not really be interested, and you arouse their innate
insecurity, their fear that as you have gotten to know them they have be-
come less exciting to you. These insecurities are devastating. Then, once
you have made them uncertain of you and of themselves, reignite their
hope, making them feel desired again. Hot and cold, hot and cold—such
coquetry is perversely pleasurable, heightening interest and keeping the ini-
tiative on your side. Never be put off by your target's anger; it is a sure sign
of enslavement.
She who would long retain her power must use her lover ill.
—OVID
The Cold Coquette
In 1952, the writer Truman Capote, a recent success in literary and social
circles, began to receive an almost daily barrage of fan mail from a young
man named Andy Warhol. An illustrator for shoe designers, fashion maga-
zines, and the like, Warhol made pretty, stylized drawings, some of which
he sent to Capote, hoping the author would include them in one of his
books. Capote did not respond. One day he came home to find Warhol
talking to his mother, with whom Capote lived. And Warhol began to tele-
phone almost daily. Finally Capote put an end to all this: "He seemed one
of those hopeless people that you just know nothing's ever going to happen
to. Just a hopeless, born loser," the writer later said.
Ten years later, Andy Warhol, aspiring artist, had his first one-man
show at the Stable Gallery in Manhattan. On the walls were a series of
silkscreened paintings based on the Campbell's soup can and the Coca-Cola
bottle. At the opening and at the party afterward, Warhol stood to the side,
staring blankly, talking little. What a contrast he was to the older generation
of artists, the abstract expressionists—mostly hard-drinking womanizers full
of bluster and aggression, big talkers who had dominated the art scene for
the previous fifteen years. And what a change from the Warhol who had
badgered Capote, and art dealers and patrons as well. The critics were bothuntil they are begging on
their knees even if it takes
a very long time.
—SIGMUND FREUD, IN A LETTER
TO A PUPIL, QUOTED IN PAUL
ROAZEN, FREUD AND HIS
FOLLOWERS
When her time was come,
that nymph most fair
brought forth a child with
whom one could have
fallen in love even in his
cradle, and she called him
Narcissus. . . . Cephisus's
child had reached his
sixteenth year, and could
be counted as at once boy
and man. Many lads and
many girls fell in love with
him, but his soft young
body housed a pride so
unyielding that none of
those boys or girls dared to
touch him. One day, as he
was driving timid deer into
his nets, he was seen by
that talkative nymph who
cannot stay silent when
another speaks, but yet has
not learned to speak first
herself. Her name is Echo,
and she always answers
back. . . . • So when she
saw Narcissus wandering
through the lonely
countryside, Echo fell in
love with him and followed
secretly in his steps. The
more closely she followed,
the nearer was the fire
which scorched her: just as
sulphur, smeared round the
tops of torches, is quickly
kindled when aflame is
brought near it. How often
she wished to make
flattering overtures to him,
to approach him with
tender pleas! • The boy, by
chance, had wandered
away from his faithful band
of comrades, and he called
out: "Is there anybody
here?" Echo answered:
"Here!" Narcissus stood
still in astonishment,72 • The Art of Seduction
baffled and intrigued by the coldness of Warhol's work; they could not fig-
ure out how the artist felt about his subjects. What was his position? What
was he trying to say? When they asked, he would simply reply, "I just do it
because I like it," or, "I love soup." The critics went wild with their inter-
pretations: "An art like Warhol's is necessarily parasitic upon the myths of
its time," one wrote; another, "The decision not to decide is a paradox that
is equal to an idea which expresses nothing but then gives it dimension."
The show was a huge success, establishing Warhol as a leading figure in a
new movement, pop art.
In 1963, Warhol rented a large Manhattan loft space that he called the
Factory, and that soon became the hub of a large entourage—hangers-on,
actors, aspiring artists. Here, particularly at night, Warhol would simply
wander about, or stand in a corner. People would gather around him, fight
for his attention, throw questions at him, and he would answer, in his non-
committal way. But no one could get close to him, physically or mentally;
he would not allow it. At the same time, if he walked by you without giv-
ing you his usual "Oh, hi," you were devastated. He hadn't noticed you;
perhaps you were on the way out.
Increasingly interested in filmmaking, Warhol cast his friends in his
movies. In effect he was offering them a kind of instant celebrity (their
"fifteen minutes of fame"—the phrase is Warhol's). Soon people were
competing for roles. He groomed women in particular for stardom: Edie
Sedgwick, Viva, Nico. Just being around him offered a kind of celebrity by
association. The Factory became the place to be seen, and stars like Judy
Garland and Tennessee Williams would go to parties there, rubbing elbows
with Sedgwick, Viva, and the bohemian lower echelons whom Warhol had
befriended. People began sending limos to bring him to parties of their
own; his presence alone was enough to turn a social evening into a scene—
even though he would pass through in near silence, keeping to himself and
leaving early.
In 1967, Warhol was asked to lecture at various colleges. He hated to
talk, particularly about his own art; "The less something has to say," he felt,
"the more perfect it is." But the money was good and Warhol always found
it hard to say no. His solution was simple: he asked an actor, Allen
Midgette, to impersonate him. Midgette was dark-haired, tan, part Chero-
kee Indian. He did not resemble Warhol in the least. But Warhol and
friends covered his face with powder, sprayed his brown hair silver, gave
him dark glasses, and dressed him in Warhol's clothes. Since Midgette knew
nothing about art, his answers to students' questions tended to be as short
and enigmatic as Warhol's own. The impersonation worked. Warhol may
have been an icon, but no one really knew him, and since he often wore
dark glasses, even his face was unfamiliar in any detail. The lecture audi-
ences were far enough away to be teased by the thought of his presence,
and no one got close enough to catch the deception. He remained elusive.
* * *looking round in every
direction. . . . He looked
behind him, and when no
one appeared, cried again:
"Why are you avoiding
me?" But all he heard
were his own words echoed
back. Still he persisted,
deceived by what he took to
be another's voice, and
said, "Come here, and let
us meet!" Echo answered:
"Let us meet!" Never
again would she reply more
willingly to any sound. To
make good her words she
came out of the wood and
made to throw her arms
round the neck she loved:
but he fled from her, crying
as he did so, "Away with
these embraces! I would die
before I would have you
touch me!" . . . Thus
scorned, she concealed
herself in the woods, hiding
her shamed face in the
shelter of the leaves, and
ever since that day she
dwells in lonely caves. Yet
still her love remained
firmly rooted in her heart,
and was increased by the
pain of having been
rejected. . . . • Narcissus
had played with her
affections, treating her as he
had previously treated other
spirits of the waters and
the woods, and his male
admirers too. Then one of
those he had scorned raised
up his hands to heaven
and prayed: "May he
himself fall in love with
another, as we have done
with him! May he too be
unable to gain his loved
one!" Nemesis heard and
granted his righteous
prayer. ...• Narcissus,
wearied with hunting in
the heat of the day, lay
down here [by a clear
pool]: for he was attracted
by the beauty of the place,
and by the spring. While
he sought to quench his
thirst, another thirst grew